
_RARY 

OF THL 

UNIVERSITY 
OF ILLINOIS 

Tom Turner Collection 

914. 
HSTr 



CENTRAL CIRCULATION BOOKSTACKS 

The person charging this material is re- 
sponsible for its renewal or its return to 
the library from which it was borrowed 
on or before the Latest Date j stamped 
below. You meiy be charged a minimum 
fee of $75.00 for each lost book. 



TO SSSf&U. TELEPHONE CENT* MM00 

UN ,VESITY - "">"* ""A" " URBANA.CHAMPA.ON 




/ 




VICTOR HUGO. 

I 



THE 



R H IN E ; 



FROM THE FRENCH OF 



VICTOR HUGO. 



BY 

D. M. AIRD, 

AUTHOR OF "THE STUDENT'S FRENCH GRAMMAR," ETC., BTC. 



COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME. 



LONDON : 

PUBLISHED BY D. AIRD, 
TAVISTOCK-STREET, CO VENT-GARDEN, 

1843. 



AIRD, 



o^ 



CONTENTS. 



LETTER I. 

From Paris to Ferte-sous-Jouarre. 

Dammartin its literature and curiosities. An accident and its results 
A German waggon. The pleasures of country travelling. The phi- 
losophical Hunchback and reasoning Gendarme. Meaux and its cu- 
riosities 3 

LETTER II. 

Montmirail Montmort Epernay. 

Montmirail Castle. Vaux Champs. The rencontre and reflections 
thereupon. Montmort Castle. Mademoiselle Jeannette. The chur- 
ches and curiosities of Epernay. Anecdote of Strozzi and Brisquet, 
Henry the Second's Fool 11 

LETTER III. 
Chalons. Sainte Menehould. Varennes. 

The reverie. The arrest of Louis the Sixteenth. The salutation and its 
effects. The signboard. Notre Dame at Chalons. Antiquarian for- 
getfulness. The inscription The watchman, wife, and gnome son 
Abbey of Notre Dame de PEpine The storm Metz hotel The 
sleeping canary A host and hostess Champagne and the significa- 
tion of Champenois Madame Sabliere and La Fontaine . 17 

LETTER IV. 

From Villiers-Cotterets to La Frontiere. 

The effects of travelling The retrograde movement Reflection 
The secret of stars The inscription "I.C." The Cathedral where 
King Pepin was crowned The prisoner's sad rencontre Rheims 
Church at Mezieres The effects of a bomb Sedan and its contents 
The transpiring events at Turenne's -birth Conversation of a Sir 
John Falstaff and his better half - . . 28 



CONTENTS. 
.LETTER V. 

Givet. 

Flemish Architects Little Givet The inscription Jose Gutierez The 
Peasant-Girl 39 

LETTER VI. 

The banks of the Meuse Dinant Namur. 

The Lesse A Flemish Garden The Mannequin The Tombstone 
Athletic Demoiselles Signboards and their utility . . 45 

LETTER VII. 

The banks of the Meuse- Huy Liege. 

A chapel of the tenth century Iron works of Mr. Cockerill; their sin- 
gular appearance Saint Paul's at Liege Palace of the Ecclesias- 
tical Princes of Liege Significant decorations of a room at Liege 49 

LETTER VIII. 

The banks of the Vesdre. Verviers. 
Railways Miners at work Louis the Fourteenth . 58 

LETTER IX. 

Aix-la-Chapelle The tomb of Charlemagne. 

hapel Legend of the Wolf and the Pine-apple Carlo Magno Bar- 
berousse The untombing of Charlemagne Exhibition of the Arm- 
chair of Charlemagne The Swiss Guide H6tel-de-Ville, the birth- 
place of Charlemagne Aix-la-Chapelle in the distance . .61 

LETTER X. 

Cologne. The banks of the Rhine. Andernach. 

Deux. Cathedral of Cologne. The peasantry. The strolling musician 
Personifiers of the gods Goulu, Gluton, Goinfre, and Gouliaf. 
Dome of the cathedral of Cologne. Epitaph. Tomb of the Three 
Wise Men of the East. Destiny. The H6tel-de-Ville. The three 
bas-reliefs. The epic poet of Cologne. Cologne at night. Time and 
its effects 77 

LETTER XI. 

Apropos of the house " Ibach." 

Man's infignificancy. His want of knowledge of himself his love for 
those who injure him. The House Ibach. Marie de Medicis, Rich- 
lieu, and Louis the Third . . . . . . . .go 



CONTENTS. 



LETTER XII. 

A few words respecting the Waldraf Museum. 

Schleis Rotten. " Stretching-out- of- the-hand system," or travelling' 

contingencies. Recapitulation .76 

LETTER XIII. * 

Andernach. * 

A view from Andernach. Village of Luttersdorf. Cathedral. Its 
relics. Andernach castle. Inscription. The Tomb of Hoche. 
Gothic church and inscription . . . . . . 1 03 

LETTER XIV. 

The Rhine. 

The Rhine at evening. Contrast of the Rhine with other rivers. The 
first people who took possession of the banks of the Rhine. Titus 
and the Twenty-second Legion. Singular coincidence. The different 
phases of the Rhingau. Mysterious populations of the Rhine. Civi- 
lization. Pepin-le-Bref, Charlemagne, and Napoleon . .109 

LETTER XV. 

The Mouse. 

Velmich. Legend of the priest and the silver bell. Giant's tomb. 
Explanation of the Mouse. The solitary inhabitant of the ruin 1 1 8 

LETTER XVI. 

The Mouse. 

Colossal profile. The duchy of M.de Nassau. Country sports; their 
punishment. A mountebank .125 

LETTER XVII. 

Saint Goar. 

The Cat its interior. Fabulous rock of Lurley. The Swiss Valley. 
Tbe fruit girl. The Reichenberg. The Barbers' Village. Legend. 
The Rheinfels. Oberwesel. French hussar .A German supper .128 

LETTER XVIII. 

Bacharach. 

Furstemberg, Sonneck and Heimberg. Europe. A happy little world. 
The cemetery .136 



IV CONTENTS. 

LETTER XIX. 

"Fire! Fire!" 

Lorch. An incident. Combat of the Hydra and Dragon. The Hotel 
P at Lorch 140 

LETTER XX. 



From Lorch to Bingen. 

Travelling on foot; its advantages and pleasures. The strange ren- 
contre. A dangerous spectator. The explication. Actors on a 
holiday. Marvellous facts and their connection with the " holiday 
of a menagerie." Furstemburg Castle. The three brothers, Cadenet, 
Luynes, and Bradnes. The three students. Sublimity of Nature. 
Ruin. The enigma. Falkenburg castle. The blooming group. 
Stella. Gantrum and Liba. Mausethurm. Hattoand the legend of 
the rats ! 147 

LETTER XXI. 

Legend of the handsome Pecopin and the beautiful 
Bauldour. 

The planet Venus and the bird Phoenix. The difference between the 
ear of a young man and that of an old one. The qualities essential 
to different embassies. Happy effect of a good thought. The Devil 
is wrong in being a gourmand. Amiable proposition of an old sage. 
The wandering Christian. The danger to which we expose our- 
selves by getting on a strange horse. The return. Bauldour 171 

LETTER XXII. 

Bingen. 

Houses at Bingen. Paradise Plain. The Klopp. -Mdlle. Bertin. The 
sage. . ...'..,.. 195 

LETTER XXIII. 

Mayence. 

Cathedral its interior. Henry Frauenlob, the Tasso of Mayence. 
Marketplace ,. . ...... . . . .202 

LETTER XXIV. 

Frankfort on the Maine. 

Jews at Frankfort. Slaughter-house. Roemer. Inhabitants of the 
Steeple 204 

LETTER XXV. 

The Rhine. 
Rafts on the Rhine. Secret Souvenirs. Obcrwerth . . . 21 1 



TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. 



SHORTLY after HUGO'S " RHINE " engaged the atten- 
tion of the public, various were the criticisms which 
appeared in the daily and weekly papers, one praising the 
work in toto, another eulogizing what is termed " THE 
RHINE," but condemning "THE CONCLUSION," which 
has no reference to the excursion, being nothing more 
nor less than a political argument respecting the right of 
Germany to the left bank of that river. Free from party 
prejudice, the translator perused the work, and was so 
pleased with " THE RHINE" as a literary production, 
that he inserted an abridgment of it in " The Mirror," 
which was warmly received by the press in general, and 
by the readers of that old and respected periodical. 

Impressed with this fact, and confident of the merit 
of u TnE RHINE," in conjunction with its utility as a 
Guide, the translator brings it once more before the 
public, in a new and embellished form. 

The work consists of a series of letters descriptive of 
an excursion up that River. The author starts from 
Paris ; and as he proceeds on his journey he relates 
in a pleasing manner the disasters attendant on travel- 
ling gives a graphic account of the towns through which 



ii TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. 

he passes and when he comes to a field of battle, an old 
church, a dilapidated castle, a relic of history, or some 
habitation rendered sacred from having been the birth- 
place of genius, he displays the might of his mind, not 
only by his extensive knowledge, but by the train of 
reflections which such scenes inspire, and by the phi- 
losophical remarks which he makes upon them. 

To the tourist this little Guide will be invaluable, and 
perhaps not less so to individuals deprived of the means 
of visiting the Rhine, for by the fireside their minds may 
wander to Andernach, range over the Waldraf Museum 
and dilate with joy as the eye scans the interesting inci- 
dents and curious Legends with which the work abounds. 



LETTER I. 



FROM PARIS TO FERTE-SOUS-JOUARRE. 

Dammartin its literature and curiosities. An accident and its re- 
sult. A German waggon. The pleasures of country travelling. 
The philosophical Hunchback and reasoning Gendarme. Meaux 
and its curiosities. 

BOUT two days ago I started from 
Paris at noon, and, pursuing my way 
by the route of Meaux, leaving St. 
Denis and Montmorency on the left, 
I cast my eyes upon the rising ground 
at the bottom of the plain, and while thinking of you, 
and tenderly bidding you farewell, a turning in the road 
hid it from my sight. You are already aware that 
when on long excursions I have a peculiar penchant for 
short stages, hate to be encumbered with luggage, and 
love to be alone in my carriage with the two friends of 
my infancy Virgil and Tacitus. 

As I had travelled by Soissons a few years ago, 
I took the Chalons road, which, owing to demolishers, or, 
as they style themselves, utilitarians, has now but very 

B 2 




4 DAMMARTIN. 

little interest left. Nanteuil-le-Haudoin has no longer 
the castle, built by Francis the First ; the magnificent 
manor of the Duke of Valois, at Villiers- Cotterets, has 
been converted into a poor-house ; and there, as almost 
everywhere, sculpture and painting the mind of by- 
gone ages, the grace of the sixteenth century have dis- 
appeared. The enormous tower of Dammartin, from which 
Montmartre, nine leagues distant, could be distinctly seen, 
has been razed to the ground. Its lizard and vertical 
form gave rise to the proverb, which I could never well 
understand, 

" 77 est comme le chateau de Dammartin, qui creve de 
rire."* 

Since it has been deprived of its old bastille, in which 
the Bishop ofMeaux, when he quarrelled with the Count 
of Champagne, took refuge with seven of his followers, 
Dammartin has ceased to engender proverbs. It is now 
only remarkable for literary compositions similar to this 
note, which I copied verbatim from a book lying on the 
table of an auberge : 

" Dammartin (Seine-et-Marne) is a small town, situ- 
ated on a hill ; lace is the chief article of manufacture. 
Hotel : Sainte Anne. Curiosities : the parish church, 
hall; 1600 inhabitants." 

The short space of time which those tyrants of dili- 
gences, called conducteurs, allow for dinner would not 
permit me to ascertain if it was true that the sixteen 
hundred inhabitants of Dammartin were really curiosities. 

In the most lovely weather, and on the finest road in 



* He is like Dammartin Castle, bursting with laughter. 



FERTE-SOUS-JOUARRE. 5 

the world, between Claye and Meaux, the wheel of my 
vehicle broke. (You know that I am one of those who 
al way s continue their journey, for, if the carriage renounce 
me, I abandon the carriage.) At that instant a small dili- 
gence passed, which was that of Touchard. There was 
only one vacant seat, I took it, and in ten minutes 
after the accident I was cnce more on my route, perched 
upon the imperiale, between a hunchback and a gendarme. 

Behold me now at Ferte-sous- Jouarre, a pretty little 
town with its three bridges, its charming isles, its old 
mill supported by five arches in the middle of the river, 
and its handsome pavilion, of the time of Louis the Thir- 
teenth, which, it is said, belonged to the Duke of Saint- 
Simon, and is now in the hands of a grocer. 

If, in fact, M. de Saint- Simon did possess that old ha- 
bitation, I very much doubt whether his natal mansion of 
Ferte-Vidame ever had a more lordly and stately appear- 
ance, or was better adapted to his rank of duke and 
peer, than thecharming littlecastle of Ferte-sous- Jouarre. 

You know, my friend, that, when travelling, I do not 
seek for incidents ; my desire is for scenes which may 
excite and create ideas, and for that new objects suffice. 
Besides, I am content with little : so that I see trees, the 
green sward, and have the open air, with a road before 
and behind me, I am perfectly satisfied. If the country 
be flat, I like an extended horizon ; if it be mountainous, 
I like the landscapes, and here there is one ever present- 
ing itself to the view. Before me is a charming valley ; 
to the right and left the strange caprices of the 
soil huge hills bearing the marks of husbandry, and 
squares, pleasing to the sight ; here and there groups 

B3 



(> AN AUBERGE DOOR. 

ot low cottages, whose roofs seem to touch the ground; 
at the end of the valley a long line of verdure, with 
a current of water, which is crossed by a little stone 
bridge, partly dismantled by age, that serves to 
unite the two highways. When I was there, a waggon 
crossed it an enormous German waggon, swelled, girt, 
and corded, which had the appearance of the belly of 
Gargantua, drawn upon four wheels by eight horses. 
Before me, near the opposite hill, and shining in the 
rays of the sun, the road takes its course, upon which 
the shadows of the tall trees represent, in black, a large 
comb minus several teeth. 

Ah, well ! the large trees, the shadow of a comb, at 
which, perhaps, you are laughing, the waggon, the old 
bridge, the low cottages create pleasure, and make 
me happy. A valley such as this, with a brilliant 
sun above, ever pleases me. I looked around and 
enjoyed the scene, but my fellow-travellers were con- 
stantly yawning. When the change of horses takes 
place, everything amuses me. After the cracking of the 
whip, the noise of the horses' hoofs, and the jingling of 
the harness, we stop at the door of an auberge. A white 
hen is seen on the highway a black one amongst the 
brambles ; a harrow or an old broken wheel in a corner ; 
and children in the height of mirth, with comely, yet far 
from clean faces, playing round a stack of hay. Above my 
head, Charles the Fifth, Joseph the Second, or Napoleon, 
is suspended great emperors, who are now no longer fit 
for anything but signs to draw custom to an inn ! 
The house is full of voices : upon the step of the door 
the grooms and the kitchen-maids are composing idyls, 






THE GENDARME AND HUNCHBACK. 7 

and the understrapper drawing water. Profiting by my 
high position upon the imperiale, I listened to the con- 
versation of the hunchback and the gendarme, and ad- 
mired the little place, with all its deformities and beauties. 

Besides, my gendarme and hunchback were philoso- 
phers, free from pride. They chatted familiarly together ; 
the former, without disdaining the hunchback the latter, 
without despising the gendarme. The hunchback payed a 
tax of six francs to Jouarre, the ancient Jovis ara, which 
he explained to the gendarme ; and when he was forced 
to give a sous to cross the bridge over the Marne, he be- 
came enraged with the government. The gendarme 
paid no taxes, but related his story with naivetS. In 
J814 he fought like a lion at Montmirail : he was then 
a consent. In 1830, in the days of July, he took fright, 
and fled : he was then a gendarme. That surprised le 
bossu, but it did not astonish me. Conscrit, he was only 
twenty years of age, poor and brave gendarme, he had a 
wife and children, and a horse of his own ; he was 
then a coward. The same man, nevertheless, but not 
the same life. Life is a sort of meat, which sauce alone 
renders palatable. No one is more dauntless than a galley- 
slave. In this world, it is not the skin that is prized it 
is the coat. He who has nothing is fearless. 

We must also admit that the two epochs were very 
different. Whatever is in vogue acts upon the soldier, as 
upon all mankind ; for the idea which strikes us, either 
stimulates or discourages. In 1 830 a revolution broke out : 
the soldier felt himself under a load ; he was cast down 
in spirits by the force of thought, which is equal to the 
force of circumstances ; he was fighting by the order of a 



MEAUX. 

stranger ; fighting for shadows created by a disordered 
brain, the dream of a distempered mind brother against 
brother all France against the Parisians. In 1814, on 
the contrary, the consent struggled with foreign enemies, 
for things easily comprehended for himself, for his father, 
his mother, and his sisters for the plough which he had 
just left for the hut which he saw smoking in the distance 
for the land which he had trod in infancy, for his suf- 
fering and bleeding country. In 1830 the soldier did not 
know what he was fighting for ; in 1814 he did more than 
know it he felt it ; he did more than feel it he saw it. 

Three things very much interested me at Meaux. To 
the right, on entering the town, is a curious gateway 
leading to an old church; the cathedral; and behind 
it an old habitation half fortified and flanked with turrets. 
There is also a court, into which I boldly entered, where 
I perceived an old woman, who was busily knitting. The 
good dame heeded me not, thus affording me an opportu- 
nity of studying a very handsome staircase of stone and 
wood- work, which, supported upon two arches, and 
crowned by a neat landing, conducted to an old dwelling. 
I had not time to take a sketch, for which I am sorry, 
for it was the first staircase of the kind I had ever seen ; 
it appeared to me to be of the fifteenth century. 

The cathedral is a noble-looking building ; its erection 
was begun in the fourteenth century, and continued to the 
fifteenth. Several repairs have lately been made, but it 
is not yet finished, for, of the two spires projected by 
the architect, one only is completed ; the other, which 
has been begun, is hidden under a covering of slate. The 
middle doorway, and that on the right, are of the fourteenth 



BENIGNE BOSSUET. 9 

century, the one on the left is of the fifteenth ; they are 
all very handsome, though time has left its impress upon 
their venerable appearance. I tried to decipher the bas- 
reliefs. The pediment of the left doorway represents the 
history of John the Baptist; but the rays of the sun, which 
fell full on the fa9ade, prevented me from satisfying my 
curiosity. The interior of the church is superb : upon the 
choir are large orgees, and at its entry two beautiful altars 
of the fifteenth century ; but unfortunately, yet true to 
the taste of country people, they are daubed over with 
yellow oil paintings. 

To the left of the choir I saw a very pretty marble 
statue of a warrior of the sixteenth century. It was in 
a kneeling position, without armour, and had no inscrip- 
tion. I was not able to find out whose statue it is ; but 
you, who know everything, would have done so. Oppo- 
site is another ; but this one bears an inscription and 
much it requires it, for even you yourself would not be 
able to discover, in the hard and unmeaning marble, the 
stern countenance of Benigne Bossuet. I saw his episco- 
pal throne, which is of very fine wainscoting, in the style 
of Louis the Fourteenth ; but, being pressed for time, I 
was not able to visit his famed cabinet at the Bishop's. 

Here is a strange fact. There was a theatre at Mftaux 
before there was one at Paris, which, as is written in a 
local manuscript, was constructed in 1547. Pieces of a 
mysterious nature were represented. A man of the name 
of Pascalus played the Devil, and ever afterwards retained 
the name. In 1562 he delivered up the city to the Hu- 
guenots ; and in the year following the Catholics hung 
him, partly because he had delivered up the city, but 



JO PHILIPPE LK BEL. 

chiefly, perhaps, on account of his appellation, "LeDiable." 
At present there are twenty theatres in Paris, but there is 
not a single one here. It is said that the good people of 
Meaux boast of this, which is to be proud that Meaux is 
not Paris. 

This country abounds with the age of Louis XIV. . 
here, the Duke of Saint Simon ; at Meaux, Bossuet ; at 
La Ferte-Milon, Racine ; at Chateau- Thierry, La Fon- 
taine all within a range of twelve miles. The great 
seigneur is neighbour to the great archbishop, and tragedy 
is elbowing fable. 

On going out of the cathedral I found that the sun had 
hid himself, which circumstance enabled me to examine 
the fa9ade. The pediment of the central doorway is the 
most curious : the inferior compartment represents Jeanne, 
wife of Philippe-le-Bel, from the deniers of whom the 
church was built after her death. The Queen of France, 
her cathedral in her hand, is represented at the gates of 
Paradise ; St. Peter has opened the folding doors to her : 
behind the queen is the handsome King Philippe, with a 
sad and rueful countenance. The queen, who is gorge- 
ously attired and exceedingly well sculptured, points out 
to St. Peter the pauvre diable of a king, and, with a side 
look and shrug of the shoulder, seems to say 
" Bah ! allow him to pass into the bargain." 




MONTMIRA1 



LETTER II. 

MONTMIRAIL MONTMORT EPERNAY. 

Montmirail Castle. Vaux Champs. The rencontre and reflections 
thereupon. Montmort Castle. Mademoiselle Jeannette. The 
churches and curiosities of Epernay. Anecdote of Strozzi and 
Brisquet, Henry the Second's Fool. 

HIRED the first carriage I met atFerte- 
sous- Jouarre, at the same time asking one 
question 

" Are the wheels in good order ? " 
On being answered in the affirmative, 
I set out for Montmirail. There is nothing of interest 
in this little town, except a pleasing landscape at the end 
of an avenue, and two beautiful walks bordered with 
trees ; all the buildings, the Chateau excepted, have a 
paltry and mean appearance. 

On Monday, about five o'clock in the evening, I left 
Montmirail, and, directing; my way towards Epernay, was 
an hour afterwards at Vaux-Champs. A few moments 
before crossing the far-famed field of battle, I met a cart 
rather strangely laden ; it was drawn by a horse and an 




12 THE EMIGRANTS. 

ass, and contained pans, kettles, old trunks, straw-bot- 
tomed chairs, with a heap of old furniture. In front, in 
a sort of basket, were three children, almost in a state of 
nudity ; behind, in another, were several hens. The 
driver wore a blouse, was walking, and carried a child 
on his back ; a few steps from him was a woman, 
also bearing a child, but it was not yet born. They were 
all hastening towards Montmirail, as if the great battle of 
1814 were on the eve of being fought. 

" Yes," I said to myself, " twenty-five years ago how 
many poor families were seen flying from place to place !" 

I was informed, however, that this was not a removal 
it was an expatriation. It was not to Montmirail they 
were going it was to America ; they were not flying at 
the sound of the trumpet of war they were hurrying 
from misery and starvation. In a word, my dear friend, 
it was a family of poor Alscian peasants, who were emi- 
grating. They could not obtain a living in their native 
land, but had been promised one in Ohio. They were 
leaving their country, ignorant of the sublime and beau- 
tiful verses that Virgil had written upon them two thou- 
sand years ago. 

These poor people were travelling in seeming cheer- 
fulness : the husband was making a thong for his whip, 
the wife singing, and the children playing ; the furniture 
had something about it of wretchedness and of disorder 
which caused pain ; the hens even appeared to me to feel 
their sad condition. 

The indifference of the heads of the family astonished 
me; I really thought that, in leaving the country in which 
we first see light, which links our hearts to so many 



MONTMORT CASTLE. 13 

sweet associations, we should, on taking a last look, shed 
a tear to the memory of the scenes of our childhood to 
the land which contained the mouldering ashes of our 
forefathers: but these people seemed regardless of all 
this ; their minds were set upon the country in which 
they hoped to obtain a livelihood. 

I looked after them for some time. Where was that 
jolting and stumbling group going ? ay, and where am 
I going ? They came to a turn in the road, and disap- 
peared ; for some time I heard the cracking of the whip, 
and the song of the woman then all was quiet. A few 
minutes afterwards I was in the glorious plains where the 
Emperor had once been. The sun was setting, the trees 
were reflecting their long shadows, the furrows which 
could be traced here and there had a lightish appearance, 
a blueish mist was at the bottom of the ravine, the fields 
seemed deserted ; nothing could be seen but two or three 
ploughs in the distance, which appeared to the eye like 
huge grasshoppers. To my left was a stone-quarry, 
where there were large millstones, some white and new, 
others old and blackened ; here, were some lying pell- 
mell on the ground there, a few standing erect, like the 
men of an enormous draught-board when upset. 

I determined upon seeing the castle of Montmort, 
which was about four leagues from Montmirail ; I took 
the Epernay road. There are sixteen tall elms, perhaps 
the most beautiful in the world, whose foliage hangs over 
the road and rustles above the head of the passenger. In 
travelling there is no tree pleases me so much as the elm ; 
it alone appears fantastical, and laughs at its neighbour, 
overturning all as it bends its head, and making all kinds 

c 



14 INTERIOR OF MONTMORT CASTLE. 

of grimaces to the passers-by in the evening. The foliage 
of the young elm may be said to spring forth when your 
eyes are fixed upon it. From Ferte to the place where 
the sixteen elms are seen, the road is bordered only with 
poplars, aspens, and walnut-trees, which circumstance 
did not at all please me. 

The country is flat, the plain extending far beyond the 
range of the eye. Suddenly, on leaving a group of trees, 
we see on the right, half hidden in a declivity, a number 
of turrets, weathercocks, and housetops it is the castle 
of Montmort. 

My cabriolet stopped, and I alighted before the door of 
the castle. It is an exquisite fortress of the sixteenth cen- 
tury, built of brick, with slate- work ; it has a double 
enceinte, a moat, a three- arched bridge, and a village at 
its foot : all around is pleasant, and the castle commands 
a most extensive view. It has a winding staircase for 
men, and a rampe for horses. Below, there is also an old 
iron door, which leads to the embrasures of the tower, 
where 1 saw four small engines of the fifteenth century. 
The garrison of the fortress at present consists of an old 
servant, Mademoiselle Jeannette, who received me with 
the greatest civility. Of the apartments of the inte- 
rior, there are only remaining a kitchen, a very fine 
vaulted room with a large mantelpiece, the great hall 
(which is now made a billiard-room), and a charming little 
cabinet, with gilt wainscoting. The great hall is a mag- 
nificent chamber : the ceiling, with its beams painted, 
gilded, and sculptured, is still entire ; the mantelpiece, 
surmounted by two noble-looking statues, is of the finest 
style of Henry the Third. The walls were in former times 



EPERNAY. 15 

covered with vast squares of tapestry, on which were the 
portraits of the family. At the revolution a few daring 
individuals of the neighbouring village tore down the ta- 
pestries and burnt them, which was a fatal blow to feu- 
dalism ; the proprietor replaced them with old engravings, 
representing views of Rome and of the battles of the great 
Conde. On leaving, I gave thirty sous to Mademoiselle 
Jeannette, who was bewildered with my bounty. 

Night was coming on when I left Montmort. The 
road is one of the most detestable in the world. It 
leads into a wood which I entered, and consequently I saw 
nothing of Epernay but colliers' huts, the smoke of which 
was forcing its way among the branches of the trees ; the 
red mouth of a distant furnace appeared for a few mo- 
ments, and the whistling wind agitated the leaves around. 
Above my head, in the heavens, the splendid chariot was 
making its voyage in the midst of stars, whilst my poor 
patache was jogging along among pebbles. 

Epernay yes, it is the town for champagne ; nothing 
more, nothing less. 

Three churches have succeeded each other ; the first, a 
Roman church, was built in 1037, by Thibautthe First 
Count of Champagne, and son of Eudes ; the second, a 
church of the Renaissance, was built in 1540, by Pierre 
Strozzi, marshal of France, Seigneur d' Epernay, who 
was killed at the siege of Thionville, in 1558 ; the third, 
the present one, appeared to me to be built from the de- 
sign of Monsieur Poterlet-Galichet, a worthy merchant, 
whose shop and name are close to the church. All three 
are admirably described and summed up by these names : 
Thibaut the First, Count of Champagne ; Pierre Strozzi, 
Marshal of France ; and Poterlet- Galichet, grocer. 



16 STROZZI AND BR1SQUET. 

To tell you the truth, the last-mentioned church is a 
hideous building, plastered white, and has a heavy ap- 
pearance, with triglyphs supporting the architrave. There 
is nothing left of the first church ; and of the second, but 
a few fine large stained windows, and an exquisite fa9ade. 
One of the windows gives the history of Noah with great 
naivete. The window-frames and fa9ade are daubed with 
the hideous plaster of the new church. It seemed to me 
as if I saw Odry, with his short white trousers, his blue 
stockings, and his large shirt-collar, carrying the casque 
and cuirass of Francis the First. 

They wished to show me the curiosity of the country 
a great cellar, which contains 100,000 bottles. On my 
way, I came in sight of a field of turnips, where poppies 
were in flower and butterflies sporting in the rays of the 
sun. I went no farther the great cave could well spare 
my visit. 

I forgot to mention that Thibaut the First was interred 
in his church, and Strozzi in his : however, I should de- 
cidedly disapprove of M. Poterlot-Galichet having a place 
in the present one. 

Strozzi was rather what may be termed a brave man. 
Brisquet, the fool of Henry the Second, amusing himself 
one day, greased, before the whole court, a very handsome 
cloak that the marshal had put on for the first time. 
This excited much laughter, and Strozzi resorted to a most 
cruel revenge. For me, I would not have laughed, nor 
would I have avenged myself. To bedaub a velvet coat 
with grease ! I have never been over-delighted with 
this pleasantry of the sixteenth century. 



LETTER III. 



CHACONS. SAINTE MENEHOULD. VARENNES. 

The reverie. The arrest of Louis the Sixteenth. The salutation and 
its effects. The signboard. Notre Dame at Chalons. Antiquarian 
forgetfulness. The inscription. The watchman, wife, and gnome 
son. Abbey of Notre Dame de 1'Epine. The storm. Metz hotel. 
The sleeping canary. A host and hostess. Champagne and the 
signification of Champenois. Madame Sabliere and La Fontaine. 




ESI 3RD AY, at the decline of day, 
my cabriolet was rapidly rolling by 
Sainte Menehould, at which time I 
was reading these sublime and beauti- 
ful lines 

" Mugitusque bourn mollesque sub arbore somni. 
******* 

Speluncae vivique lacus." * 

I remained for some time leaning upon my book. My 
soul was full of those vague ideas sad, yet sweet which 
the rays of a setting sun generally awaken in my mind, 
when the noise of the carriage -wheels on the causeway 
awoke me from my reverie. We were entering a town ; 
but what town was it? The coachman replied, "It is 
Varennes." We traversed a street which had sorne- 

c 3 



18 VARENNES. 

thing grave and melancholy in its appearance ; the doors 
and shutters of the houses were closed, and grass was grow- 
ing in the courts. Suddenly, after having passed an old 
gateway of the time of Louis the Thirteenth, we entered 
a triangular square, surrounded with small white houses, 
of one story high. Louis the Sixteenth, on his flight 
in 1791, was arrested in this square by Drouet, the 
postmaster of Sainte Menehould. There was then no 
post at Varennes. I descended from my carriage, and 
for some time kept looking at this little square, which, 
to the man who does not think of past events, has a 
dull appearance ; but to him who does, it has a sinister 
one. It is reported here that Louis, when arrested, pro- 
tested so strongly that he was not the king (what Charles 
the First would never have done), that the people, half 
inclined to credit his statement, were about to release him, 
when a Monsieur Eth, who had a secret hatred against 
the court, appeared. This person, like a Judas Iscariot, 
said to the king 

" Good day, Sire." 

This was enough. The king was seized. There were 
five of the royal family in the carriage with him ; and the 
miserable, with these words, effected their downfall. 

" Bon jour, Sire," was for Louis the Sixteenth, for 
Marie Antoinette, and for Madame Elisabeth, the guillo- 
tine ; for the Dauphin, the agony of the Temple; and for 
Madame Royale, exile and the extinction of her race. 

Varennes is about fifteen leagues from Rheims that 
is to say, for my coachman ; to the mind there is an 
abyss the revolution. 

I put up for the night at a very ancient-looking auberge, 



CHURCH AT VARENNES. 19 

which had the portrait of ^ouis Philippe above the door, 
with the words inscribed 

" Au Grand Monarque." 

During the last hundred years, most probably, Louis the 
Fifteenth, Buonaparte, and Charles the Tenth, had each 
figured in his turn. Louis the Sixteenth was, perhaps, 
arrested at the Grand Monarque, and, on looking up, saw 
the portrait of himself Pauvre Grand Monarque ! 

This morning I took a walk into the town, which is 
very pleasantly situated upon the banks of a very 
pretty river. The old houses of the high town, seen from 
the right bank, form a very picturesque amphitheatre ; 
but the church, which is in the low town, is truly insig- 
nificant. It is within sight of my inn, and I can see it 
from the table at which 1 write. The steeple is dated 
1766, exactly a year before Madame Royale was born. 

I visited the church ; and if I did not find that all I 
expected, I found what I did not expect that is, a very 
pretty Notre Dame at Chalons. What have the antiqua- 
ries been thinking of, when, speaking of Sainte Etienne, 
they never breathed a word about Notre Dame. The 
Notre Dame of Chalons is a Eoman church, with arched, 
roofs, and a superb spire bearing the date of the four- 
teenth century. In the middle is a lantern crowned with 
small pinions. A beautiful coup d'oeil is afforded here (a 
pleasure which I enjoyed) of the town, the Marne, and 
the surrounding hills. The traveller may also admire the 
splendid windows of Notre Dame, and a rich portail of 
the thirteenth century. In 1793 the people of this 
place broke the windows and pulled down the statues ; 



20 THE WATCHMAN. 

they also destroyed the lateral gateway of the cathedral, 
and all the sculpture that was within their reach. Notre 
Dame had four spires, three of which are demolished. It 
testifies the height of stupidity, which is nowhere so evi- 
dent as here. The French revolution was a terrible one ; 
the revolution Champenoise was attended with acts of the 
greatest folly. 

In the lantern I found engraved on the lead an in- 
scription, apparently in the writing of the sixteenth 
century 

" Le 28 Aoftt, 1508, la paix a ete publiee a Chal .." 

This inscription, which is partly defaced, and which no one 
has sought to decipher, is all that remains of that great 
political act, of that great event, the concluding of peace 
between Henry the Third and the Huguenots, by the in- 
tercession of the Duke of Anjou, previously Duke of 
Alen9on. The Duke of Anjou was the king's brother, 
and had an eye upon the Pays Bas and pretensions to the 
hand of Elizabeth of England ; but the war with the re- 
ligious sects which succeeded thwarted him in his plans. 
That peace, that happy event, proclaimed at Chalons in 
1580, was forgotten by the whole world on the 22d July, 
1839. 

The person who conducted me to this lantern was the 
watchman of the town, who passed his life in the guette, 
a little box with four small windows. His box and lad- 
der are to him a universe ; he is the eye of the 
town, always open, always awake. Perpetual insomnia 
would be somewhat impossible. True, his wife helps 
him. Every night at twelve o'clock he goes to 



NOTRE DAME DB l/EPINE. 21 

sleep, and she goes to watch ; at noon they again change 
places : thus performing their rounds by each other's 
side without coming in contact, except for a minute at 
noon and another at midnight. A little gnome, rather 
comically shaped, and whom they call their son, is the 
result of the tangent. 

There are three churches at Chalons : St. Alpin, St. 
Jean, and St. Loup. 

About two leagues from Chalons, upon the Sainte 
Menehould road, the magnificent Abbey of Notre Dame 
de 1'Epine suddenly appears before you. I remained up- 
wards of two hours in this church, rambling round and 
round. The wind was blowing strongly. I held my hat 
with both hands, and stood, my eyes filled with dust, ad- 
miring the beauties of the edifice. 

I continued my route, and after travelling three miles 
we came to a village where the inhabitants were celebrat- 
ing, with music and dancing, the fete of the place. On 
leaving I perceived, on the summit of a hill, a mean-look- 
ing white house, upon the top of which was a telescope, 
shaped like an enormous black insect, corresponding with 
Notre Dame de 1'Epine. 

The sun was setting, the twilight approaching, and the 
sky was cloudy ; from the end of the plain I looked at 
the hills, which were half- covered with heath, like a ca- 
mail d'evdque, and, on turning my head, saw a flock of 
geese that were cackling joyously. 

"We are going to have rain," the coachman said. 

I looked up : the half of the western sky was shrouded 
in an immense black cloud ; the wind became boisterous ; 
the hemlock in flower was levelled with the ground ; and 



22 THE STORM. 

the trees seemed to speak in a voice of terror. A few 
moments expired : the rain poured down in torrents; and 
all was darkness, save a beam of light which escaped from 
the declining sun. There was not a creature to be heard 
or seen neither man upon the road, nor bird in the air. 
Loud peals of thunder shook the heavens, and brilliant 
flashes of lightning contrasted wildly with the prevailing 
darkness. 

A blast of wind at length dispersed the clouds towards 
the east, and the sky became pure and calm. 

On arriving at Sainte Menehould the stars were shin- 
ing brightly. This is a picturesque little town, with its 
houses built at random upon the summit of a green hill, 
and surmounted by tall trees. I saw one thing worthy of 
remark at Sainte Menehould that is, the kitchen at the 
hotel of Metz. It may be well termed a kitchen : one of 
the walls is covered with pans, the other with crockery ; 
in the middle, opposite the window, is a splendid fire and 
an enormous chimney ; all kinds of baskets and lamps 
hang from the ceiling ; by the chimney are the jacks, 
spits, pot-hangers, kettles, and pans of all forms and 
sizes : the shining hearth reflects light in all corners of 
the room, throwing a rosy hue on the crockery, causing 
the edifice of copper to shine like a wall of brass, while 
the ceiling is crowded with fantastic shadows. If I were 
a Homer or a Rabelais, I would say, 

" That kitchen is a world, and the fireplace is its 
sun." 

It is indeed a world a republic consisting of men, 
women, and children ; male and female servants, scul- 
lions and waiters ; frying-pans over chafing-dishes ; pots 



THE CANARY. 23 

and kettles; children playing, cats and dogs mewing 
and barking, with the master overlooking all ; mens aglt 
at molem. In a corner is a clock, which gravely warns 
the occupants that time is ever on the wing. 

Among the innumerable things which hung from the 
ceiling, there was one which interested me more than all 
the others a small cage, in which a canary was sleep - 
ing. The poor creature seemed to me to be a most ad- 
mirable emblem of confidence ; notwithstanding the un- 
wholesomeness of the den, the furnace, the frightful 
kitchen, which is day and night filled with uproar, the 
bird sleeps. A noise, indeed, is made around it the 
men swear, the women quarrel, the children cry, the dogs 
bark, the cats mew, the clock strikes, the water-cock 
spouts, the bottles burst, the diligences pass under the 
arched roof, making a noise like thunder, yet the eye- 
lid of the feathered inhabitant moves not. 

A propos, I must declare that people generally speak 
too harshly of inns, and I myself have often been the first 
to do so. An auberge, take it all in all, is a very good 
thing, and we are often very glad to find one. Besides, 
I have often remarked that there is almost in all auberges 
an agreeable landlady ; as for the host, let turbulent tra- 
vellers have him give me the hostess The former is a 
being of a morose and disagreeable nature, the latter 
cheerful and amiable. Poor woman ! sometimes she is 
old, sometimes in bad health, and very often exceedingly 
bulky. She comes and goes ; is here and there this 
moment at the heels of the servants, the next one chas- 
ing the dogs : she compliments the travellers, stimulates 
the head servant; smiles to one, scolds another; stirs the 



24 CLERMONT. 

fire ; takes up this, and sends away that ; in fact, she is 
the soul of that great body called an auberge, the host 
being fit for nothing but drinking in a corner with wag- 
goners. The fair hostess of La Ville de Metz, at St. 
Menehould, is a young woman about sixteen years of age, 
is exceedingly active, and she conducts her household 
affairs with the greatest regularity and precision. The 
host, her father, is an exception to the general run of inn- 
keepers, being a very intelligent and worthy man ; in 
all, this is an excellent auberge. 

I left Sainte Menehould, and pursued my way to Cler- 
mont. The road between those towns is charming ; on 
both sides is a chaos of trees, whose green leaves glitter in 
the sun, and cast their detached and irregular shadows 
on the highway. The villages have something about them 
of a Swiss and German appearance, white stone houses, 
with large slate roofs projecting three or four feet from 
the wall. I felt that I was in the neighbourhood of moun- 
tains : the Ardennes, in fact, are here. 

Before arriving at the borough of Clermont we pass 
an admirable valley, where the Marne and Meuse meet. 
The road is betwixt two hills, and is so steep that we 
see nothing before us but an abyss of foliage. 

Clermont is a very handsome village, headed by a 
church, and surrounded with verdure. 

My friend, in glancing over this letter I find that I 
have made use of the word Ckampenois, which, by some 
proverbial acceptation, is somewhat ironical ; you must 
not mistake the sense which I affix to it. The proverb 
more familiar, perhaps, than it is applicable speaks of 
Champagne as Madame la Sabliere spoke of La Fon- 



CHAMPAGNE. 25 

taine "That he was a man of stupid genius," which 
expression is applied to a genius of Champagne. That, 
however, neither prevents La Fontaine from being an 
admirable poet, nor Champagne from being a noble and 
illustrious country. Virgil might have spoken of it, as 
he did of Italy 

" Alma parens frugum, 
Alma virum.*' 

Champagne is the birthplace, the country of Amyot 
that bonhomme who took up the theme of Plutarch, as La 
Fontaine did that of ^Esop ; of Thibaut IV., who asked 
nothing better than being the father of Saint Louis ; of 
Charlier de Gerson, who was chancellor of the university 
of Paris ; of Amadis, Jamyn, Colbert, Diderot ; of two 
painters, Lantare and Valentin ; of two sculptors, Girar- 
don and Bouchardon ; of two historians, Flodoard and 
Mabillon ; of two cardinals full of genius, Henry de Lor- 
raine and Paul de Gondi ; of two popes full of virtue, 
Martin the Fourth and Urban the Fourth ; of a king 
full of glory, Phillipe- Auguste. 

Champagne is a powerful province, and there is no 
town or village in it that has not something remarkable. 
Rheims, which owns the cathedral of cathedrals, was the 
place where Clovis was baptized. It was at Andelot that 
the interview between Gontran king of Bourgogne, and 
Childebert king of Austrasie, took place. Hinemar took 
refuge at Epernay, Abailard at Provim, Heloise at Pa- 
raclet. The Gordiens triumphed at Langres, and in the 
middle age its citizens destroyed the seven formidable 
castles, Chagney, Saint Broing, Neuilly Cotton, Cobons, 
Bourg, Humes, and Pailly. The league was concluded 

D 



26 SOUVENIRS OF CHAMPAGNE. 

at Joinville in 1584 ; Henry the Fourth was protected at 
Chalons in 1591 ; the Prince of Orange was killed at 
Saint Dizier ; Sezenne is the ancient place of arms of the 
Dukes of Bourgogne ; Ligny 1'Abbaye was founded in 
the domains of Seigneur Chatillon, by Saint Bernard , 
who promised the Seigneur as many perches of land in 
heaven as the Sire had given him upon earth. Mouzon 
is the fief of the Abbot of Saint Hubert, who sends six 
coursing dogs, and the same number of birds of prey, 
every year to the king of France. 

Champagne retains the empreinte of our ancient kings 
Charles the Simple for the sirerie at Attigny ; Saint Louis 
and Louis the Fourteenth, the devout king and the great 
king, first lifted arms in Champagne ; the former in 
1228, when raising the siege of Troyes the latter in 
1652, at Sainte Menehould. 

The ancient annals of Champagne are not less glorious 
than the modern. The country is full of sweet souvenirs 
Merovee and the Francs, Actius and the Romans, Theo- 
doric and the Visigoths, Mount Jules and the tomb of 
Jovinus. Antiquity here lives, speaks, and cries out to 
the traveller, " Sta, viator ! " 

From the days of the Romans to the present day, the 
towns of Champagne, surrounded at times by the Alains, 
the Sueves, the Vandals, and the Germans, would have 
been burnt to the ground, rather than have been given 
over to the enemy. They are built upon rocks, and 
have taken for their device u Donee moveantur." 

In 451 the Huns were destroyed in the plains of 
Champagne; in 1814, if God had willed it, the Russians 
would also have met the same fate. 



ELUCIDATION. 27 

Never speak of this province but with respect. How 
many of its children have been sacrificed for France ! In 
1813 the population of one district of Marne consisted of 
311,000. In 1830 it had only 309,000, showing that 
fifteen years of peace have not repaired the loss. 

But to the explanation : When any one applies 
the word Mte to Champagne, change the meaning : it 
signifies naif, simple, rude, primitive, and redoubtable in 
need. A bUe may be a lion or an eagle. It is what 
Champagne was in 1814. 



LETTER IV. 



FROM VILLERS-COTTERETS TO LA FRONTIERE. 

The effects of travelling. The retrograde movement. Reflection. 
The secret of stars. The inscription "I. C." The cathedral where 
King Pepin was crowned. The prisoner's sad rencontre. Rheims. 
Church at Mezieres. The effects of a bomb. Sedan and its con- 
tents. The transpiring events at Turenne's birth. Conversation of 
a Sir John Falstaff and his better half. 

Y DEAR FRIEND, I write to-day 
from Givet, where I arrived at four 
o'clock in the morning, bruised by 
the jolting of a frightful vehicle, 
which the people here call a dili- 
gence. I stretched myself, dressed as I was, upon a 
bed, fell asleep, and awoke two hours afterwards. On 
opening the window of my chamber, with the idea of 
enjoying the view which it might afford, the only objects 
which caught my attention were the angle of a little 
white cottage, a water-spout, and the wheel of a cart. 
As for my room, it is an immense hall, ornamented with 
no less than four beds. 

Since my last letter, a trifling incident, not worth re- 
lating, caused me to make a retrograde movement from 




C^SAB, CXOVIS, AMD NAPOLEON. 29 

Varennes to Villers-Cotterets ; and the day before yester- 
day, in order to make up for lost time, I took the diligence 
for Soissons. There was no passenger but myself, a cir- 
cumstance which was in no way disconcerting; for it 
gave me an opportunity of turning over at my ease the 
pages of some of my favourite authors. 

As I approached Soissons, day was fast fading, and 
night had cast its sombre aspect over that beautiful val- 
ley where the road, after passing the hamlet of La Folie, 
gradually descends, and leads to the cathedral of Saint- 
Jean-des-Vignes. Notwithstanding the fog which rose 
around, I perceived the walls and roofs of the houses of 
Soissons, with a half-moon peering from behind them. I 
alighted, and, with a heart fully acknowledging the sub- 
limity of nature, gazed upon this imposing scene. A 
grasshopper was chirping in the neighbouring field ; the 
trees by the road -side were softly rustling ; and I saw, 
with the mind's eye, peace hovering over the plain, now 
solitary and tranquil, where Caesar had conquered, Clovls 
had exercised his authority, aud where Napoleon had all 
but fallen. It shows that men, even Caesar, Clovis, and 
Napoleon, are only passing shadows ; and that war is a 
fantasy which terminates with them ; whilst God and 
nature, which comes from God and peace, which comes 
from nature are things of eternity. 

Determined on taking the Sedan mail, which does not 
arrive at Soissons till midnight, I allowed the dili- 
gence to proceed, knowing that I had plenty of time be- 
fore me. The trctjefwhich separated me from Soissons 
was only a charming promenade. When a short distance 
from the town, I sat down near a very pretty little house, 

D 3 



30 THE STARS. 

upon which the forge of a Vulcan, who lived opposite, 
shed a faint light. I looked upwards : the heavens were 
serene and beautiful and the planets, Jupiter, Mars, 
and Saturn, were shining in the south-east. The former, 
whose course for three months is somewhat complicated, 
was between the other two, and was making a 
perfectly straight line. More to the east was Mars, 
fiery in his appearance, and imitating the starry constel- 
lation by a kind of famboiement farouche. A little above, 
shining softly, and with a white and peaceful appearance, 
was that monster-planet, the frightful and mysterious 
world which we call Saturn. On the other side, at the 
extremity of the view, a magnificent beacon reflected its 
light on the sombre hills which separate Noyon from 
Soissonnais. As I was asking myself the utility of such 
a light in these immense plains, I saw it leaving the 
border of the hills, bounding through the fog, and mount- 
ing near the zenith. That beacon was Aldebaran, the 
three-coloured sun, the enormous purple, silvery, and 
blue star, which rises majestically in the waste of the 
crepuscule. 

O, my friend, what a secret is there then in these stars ! 
The poetical, the thinking, and the imaginative, have, in 
turn, contemplated, studied, and admired them : the one, 
like Zoroaster, in bewilderment the others, like Pytha- 
gorus, with inexpressible awe. Seth named the stars, as 
Adam did animals. The Chaldeans and the Geneth- 
liaques, Esdras and Zorobabel, Orpheus and Homer, Phe- 
recide, Xenophon, Hecatseus, Herodotus, andThucydides 
all eyes of the earth, so long shut, so long deprived of 
light have been fixed from one age to another on those 



MUSIC OF THE SPHERES. 31 

orbs of heaven which are always open, always lighted up, 
always living. The same planets, the same stars, that 
fix our attention to-night, have been gazed at by all these 
men. Job speaks of Orion and of the Pleiades ; Plato 
listened and distinctly heard the vague music of the 
spheres ; Pliny thought that the sun was God, and that 
the spots on the moon were the exhalations of the earth. 
The poets of Tartary named the pole senisticol, which 
means an iron nail; Rocoles says, "that the lion might 
as well have been called the ape ; " Pacuvius would not 
credit astrologers, under the idea that they would be equal 
to Jupiter : 

"Nam si qui, quae eventura sunt, praevideant, 
./Equip arent Jovi,'* 

Favorinus asked himself this question: " Si vitae 
raortisque hominum rerumque humananim omnium et 
ratio et causa in ecelo et apud stellasforet ? " Aulus-Gel- 
lius, sailing from Egine to Piree, sat all night upon the 
poop, contemplating the stars. " Noxfuit clemens mare, 
et anni cestas* coehimque liquide serenum ; sedebamus ergo 
in puppi simul universi et lucentia sidera consider abamus.' 
Horace himself that practical philosopher that Voltaire 
of the age of Augustus greater poet, it is true, than the 
Voltaire of Louis the Fifteenth shuddered when look- 
ing at the stars, and wrote these terrible lines : 

" Hunc solem, et stellas et decedentia certis, 
Tempora momentis sunt qui formidine nulla 
Imbuti spectant." 

As for me, I do not fear the stars I love them : still I 
have never reflected without a certain conviction that 



.'V2 THE INSCRIPTION " I. C." 

the normal position of the heavens is night ; and what we 
call " day " arises from the appearance of a bright lu- 
minary. 

We cannot be always looking at immensity ; ecstasy is 
akin to prayer ; the latter breathes consolation, but the 
former fatigues and enervates. On taking my eyes from 
above, I cast them upon the wall facing me ; and even 
there subject was afforded for meditation and thought. 
On it were traces, almost entirely effaced, of an an- 
cient inscription. I could only make out I. C. With- 
out doubt, they referred either to Pagan or Chris- 
tian Rome to the city of strength, or to that of faith. I 
remained my eyes fixed upon the stone, which seemed to 
become animate lost in vain hypotheses. When I. C. 
were first known to men, they governed the world ; the 
second time, they reformed it Julius Caesar and Jesus 
Christ. 

Dante, on putting Brutus the murderer, and Judas 
the traitor, together in the lowest extremity of hell, and 
causing them to be devoured by Satan, must have been 
influenced by a similar thought to that which engrossed 
my whole attention. 

Three cities are now added to Soissons, the Noviodu- 
num of the Gauls, the Augusta Suessonium of the Ro- 
mans, and the old Soissons of Clovis, of Charles the 
Simple, and of the Duke of Mayenne. Nothing now re- 
mains of Suessonium but a few ruins ; among others, the 
ancient temple, which has been converted into the chapel 
of Saint Pierre. Old Soissons is more fortunate, for it 
still possesses Saint- Jean -des-Vignes, its ancient castle, 
and the cathedral where Pepin was crowned in 752. 



SOISSONS. 33 

It was very dark when I entered Soissons ; therefore, 
instead of looking for Noviodunum or Suessonium, I re- 
galed myself with a tolerably good supper. Being re- 
freshed, I went out and wandered about the gigantic 
silhouette of Saint- Jean-desVignes, and it was twelve 
o'clock before I returned to the auberge, in which silence 
and darkness prevailed. 

Suddenly, however, a noise broke upon my ear ; it was 
the arrival of the mail-coach, which stopped a few paces 
from my inn. There was only one vacant place, which I 
took ; and was on the point of installing myself, when a 
strange uproar cries of women, noise of wheels, and 
trampling of horses broke out in a dark narrow street ad- 
joining. Although the driver stated that he would leave 
in five minutes, I hurried to the spot; and, on entering the 
little street, saw, at the base of a huge wall, which had the 
odious and chilling aspect peculiar to prisons, a low 
arched door, which was open. A few paces farther on, 
a mournful-looking vehicle, stationed between two gen- 
darmes onhorseback, was half hid in the obscurity; and near 
the wicket four or five men were struggling and endea- 
vouring to force a woman, who was screaming fearfully, 
into the carriage. The dim light of a lantern, which was 
carried by an old man, cast a lugubrious glare upon the 
scene. The female, a robust countrywoman about thirty 
years of age, was fiercely struggling with the men strik- 
ing, scratching, and shrieking; and when the lamp shone 
upon the wild countenance and dishevelled hair of the poor 
creature, it disclosed, melancholy to behold, a striking pic- 
ture of despair. She at last seized one of the iron bars of the 
wicket; but the men, with a violent effort, forced her from 



34 THE CRIMINALS. 

it, and carried her to the cart. This vehicle, upon which 
the lantern was then shining, had no windows, small holes 
drilled in front supplied their place. There was a door 
at the back part, which was shut, and guarded by large 
bolts of iron. When opened, the interior of the carriole 
disclosed a sort of box, without light, almost without air. 
It was divided into oblong compartments by a thick board, 
the one having no communication with the other, and the 
door shutting both at the same time. One of the cells, 
that to the left, was empty, but the right one was occupied. 
In the angle, squatted like a wild beast, was a man if 
a kind of spectre, with a broad face, a flat head, large 
temples, grizzled hair, short legs, and dressed in a pair 
of old torn trousers and tattered coat, may be called one. 
The legs of the wretched man were closely chained to- 
gether ; a shoe was on his right foot, while his left, which 
was enveloped in linen stained with blood, was partly ex- 
posed to view. This creature, hideous to the sight, who 
was eating a piece of black bread, paid no attention to what 
was going on around him ; nor did he look up to see the 
wretched companion that was brought him. The poor 
woman was still struggling with the men, who were en- 
deavouring to thrust her into the empty cell, and was cry- 
ing out 

" No, I shall not ! Never never ! kill me sooner 
never !" 

In one of her convulsions she cast her eyes into the ve- 
hicle ; and on perceiving the prisoner she suddenly 
ceased crying: her legs trembled, her whole frame shook, 
and she exclaimed, with a stifled voice, but with an ex- 
pression of anguish that I shall never forget 



BRAINE-SUR-VESLE. 35 

"Oh, that man !" 

The prisoner looked at her with a confused yet 
ferocious air. I could resist no longer. It was clear 
that she had committed some unlawful crime perhaps 
robbery, perhaps worse ; that the gendarmes were trans- 
porting her from one place to another in one of those 
odious vehicles metaphorically called by the gamins of 
Paris " paniers a salade;" but she was a woman, and I 
thought it my duty to interfere. I called to the galley- 
sergeant, but he paid no attention to me. A worthy 
gendarme, however, stepped forward, and, proud of his 
little authority, demanded my passport. Unfortunately 
I had just locked up that essentielm my trunk, and, whilst 
entering into explanations, the jailors made a powerful 
effort, plunged the woman half-dead into the cart, shut 
the door, pushed the bolts, and when I turned round all 
had left, and nothing was heard but the rattling of the 
wheels and the trampling of the escort. 

A few minutes afterwards I was comfortably seated 
in a carriage drawn by four excellent horses. I thought 
of the wretched woman, and I contrasted, with an aching- 
heart, my situation with hers. In the midst of such 
thoughts I fell asleep. 

When I awoke, morning was breaking ; we were in 
a beautiful valley, perhaps that of Braine-sur-Vesle. 
Venus was shining above our heads, and its rays cast a 
serenity and an inexpressible melancholy upon the fields 
and woods it was a celestial eye which opened upon 
this sleeping and lovely country. 

Fpom Rheims to Rethel there is nothing interesting, 
and the latter place affords little worthy of remark. 



36 THE BOMB. 

On arriving at Mezieres I anxiously looked on all 
sides for the ruins of the ancient castle of Hellebarde, 
but could not perceive them. The church of Mezieres 
is of the fifteenth century, and has, to the right and left 
of the choir, two bas-reliefs of the time of Charles the 
Eighth. On the north of the apside I perceived an 
inscription upon the wall, which testified that Mezieres 
was cruelly assailed and bombarded by the Prussians in 
1815 ; and above it these words: 

' ' Lector leva oculos ad fornicem et vide quasi quoddam 
divinte manus indicium." 

I raised my eyes and saw a large rent in the vault 
above my head, and in it an enormous bomb, which, 
after having pierced the roof of the church, the timber- 
work, and the masonry, was thus stopped, as if by 
miracle, when about to fall upon the pavement. Twenty- 
five years have now expired, and still it remains in the 
same position. That bomb, and that wide rent which is 
above the head of the visitor, produce a very strange 
effect, which is heightened upon reflecting that the first 
bomb made use of in war was at Mezieres, in the year 
1521. On the other side of the church another inscrip- 
tion informs us that the nuptials of Charles the Ninth 
with Elizabeth of Austria were happily celebrated in this 
church, on the 17th November, 1570, two years before 
Saint Bartholomew. The grand portail is of this epoch, 
and, consequently, noble in appearance, and of a refined 
taste. 

As for Mezieres there are some very tall trees upon 
its ramparts ; the streets are clean, and remarkable for 
their dullness ; there is nothing about the town that re- 



TRANSPIRING EVENTS AT TURENNE'S BIRTH. 37 

markable for their dullness, there is nothing about the 
town that reminds us of Hellebarde and Garinus, the 
founders ; Balthazar, who ransacked it ; Count Hugo, 
who ennobled it ; or of Foulques and Adalberon, who 
besieged it. 

It was near noon when I arrived at Sedan, and, instead 
of seeing monuments and edifices, I saw what the town 
contains pretty women, handsome carabiniers, cannons, 
and trees and prairies along the Meuse. I tried to find 
some vestiges of M. de Turenne, but did not succeed. 
The pavilion where he was born is demolished, but a 
black stone, with the following inscription, supplies its 
place : 

"Ici NAQUIT TURENNE 
LE ii SEPTEMBRE MDCXI." 

The date, which is in prominent gold letters, struck 
me, and my mind reverted to that eventful period. In 
1611 Sully retired ; Henry the Fourth was assassinated 
the preceding year ; Louis the Thirteenth, who should 
have died as his father did, on the 14th of May, was then 
ten years old ; Richelieu was in his 26th year ; the good 
people of Rouen called a man Petit Pierre who was after- 
wards named by the universe le Grand Corneille ; Shak- 
speare and Cervantes were living, so were Branthome 
and Pierre Mathieu. In 1611 Papirien Masson and 
Jean Bus6e breathed their last ; Gustave Adolphe suc- 
ceeded the visionary monarch Charles the Ninth of 
Sweden ; Philippe the Third, in spite of the advice of the 
Duke of Osunna, drove the Moors from Spain ; and the 
German astronomer, Jean Fabricius, discovered the spots 
on the sun. Such are the events lhat were transpiring 





38 CONVERSATION OF A Sill JOHN FALSTAFF. 

in the world when Turenne was born. Sedan has not 
been a pious guardian of his memory, nor, in fact, has it 
in its annals any souvenirs of William de la Marck, the 
Boar of Ardennes, the frightful predecessor of Turenne. 

After having made a good breakfast in the Hotel de la 
Croix d'Or, I decided on returning on foot to Mezieres, 
to take the coach for Givet. The distance is five leagues, 
but the road is truly picturesque, running along the valley 
of the Meuse. About a league from Sedan we meet 
Donchery, with its old wooden bridge and fine trees; 
villages with smiling urchins ; chatelets shrouded in mas- 
sive verdure ; and large prairies, where sheep and oxen 
are grazing in the sun. 

I arrived at Mezieres at seven in the evening, and at 
eight, seated in a miserable coupt, between a Sir John 
Falstaff and a female who might well have passed for 
his better half, set out for Givet. The two gros dtres began 
to converse, and spoke of events as striking as they were 
stirring, such as, " that it is now twenty -two years since 
I was at Rocroy," "that M. Crochard, the secretary 
of the under -prefecture, is his intimate friend" " that, 
as it is twelve at night, the good Mons. Crochard must 
be in bed." 

Day dawned. We approached a drawbridge, which 
was lowered, and shortly afterwards we entered into a 
narrow street, that led into a court, where servants came 
running with candles in their hands, and grooms with 
lanterns. I was at Givet. 



LETTER V. 



GIVET. 

Flemish Architects Little Gi vet The Inscription Jose Gutierez. 
The Peasant- Girl. 




HIS is an exceedingly pretty town, 
situated on the Meuse, which sepa- 
rates Great from Little Givet, and is 
headed by a ridge of rocks, at the 
summit of which is the fort of Char- 
lemont. The auberge, called the Ho- 
tel of the Golden Mount, is very comfortable, and tra- 
vellers may find refreshments there, which, though not 
the most exquisite, are palatable to the hungry, and a 
bed, though not'the softest in the world, highly accept- 
able to the weary. 

The steeple of Little Givet is of simple construction ; 
that of Great Givet is more complicated more recherche. 
The worthy architect, in planning the latter, had, with- 
out doubt, recourse to the following mode : He took a 
priest's square cap, on which he placed, bottom upwards, 
a large plate; above this plate a sugar-loaf ^headed 

E'2 



40 GIVET. 

with a bottle, a steel spike thrust into its neck ; and on 
the spike he perched a cock, the pnrport of which was to 
inform its beholders th way that the wind blew. Sup- 
posing that he took a day to each idea, he therefore must 
have rested the seventh. This artist was certainly 
Flemish. 

About two centuries ago Flemish architects imagined 
that nothing could exceed in beauty gigantic pieces of 
slate, resembling kitchen-ware, so, when they had a 
steeple to build, they profited by the occasion, and decked 
their towns with a host of colossal plates. 

Nevertheless, a view of Givet still has charms, espe- 
cially if taken towards evening from the middle of the 
bridge. When I viewed it, night, which helps to screen 
the foolish acts of man, had begun to cast its mantle over 
the contour of this singularly-built steeple ; smoke was 
hovering about the roofs of the houses ; at my left, the 
elms were softly rustling ; to my right, an ancient tower 
was reflected in the bosom of the Meuse ; further on, at 
the foot of the redoubtable rock of Charlemont, I de- 
scried, like a white line, a long edifice, which I found to 
be nothing more than an uninhabited country-house ; 
above the town, the towers, and steeples, an immense 
ridge of rocks hid the horizon from my sight ; and in the 
distance, in a clear sky, the half-moon appeared with so 
much purity with so much of heaven in it that I ima- 
gined that God had exposed to our view part of his nuptial 
ring, to testify his wedded affection to man. 

Next day I determined to visit the venerable turret 
which crowned, in seeming respect, Little Givet. The 
road is steep, and commands the services of both hands 



JOSE GUTIERBZ. 41 

and feet. After some inconsiderable trouble, and no 
slight labour of all-fours, I reached the foot of the tower, 
which is fast falling into ruin, where I found a huge door, 
secured by a large padlock. I knocked and shouted, but 
no one answered, so I was obliged to descend without 
gratifying my curiosity. My pains, however, were not 
altogether lost, for, on passing the old edifice, I discovered 
among the rubbish, which is daily crumbling into 
dust and falling into the stream, a large stone, on which 
were the vestiges of an inscription. I examined them at- 
tentively, but could only make out the following letters : 

"LOQVB . . . SA . L . OMBRE 
PARAS . . . MODI . SL . 
ACAV . P . . . SOTROS." 

Above these letters, which seem to have been scratched 
with a nail, the signature, " IOSE GVITEBEZ, 1643," re- 
mained entire. 

Inscriptions, from boyhood, always interested me ; and 
I assure you, this one opened up a vein of thought and 
enquiry. What did this inscription signify ? in what 
language was it written ? By making some allowance 
for orthography, one might imagine that it was French ; 
but, on considering that the words para and otros were 
Spanish, I concluded that it must have been written in 
Castilian. After some reflection, I imagined that these 
were the original words : 

"LO QUE EMPESA EL HOMBRE 
PARA SIMISMO DIOS LE 
ACAVA PARA LOS OTROS." 

''What man begins for himself, God finishes for 
others.'' 

E3 



42 JOSE GUTIEREZ 

But who was this Gutierez ? The stone had evidently 
been taken from the interior of the tower. It was in 
1643 that the battle of Rocroy was fought. Was Jose 
Gutierez, then, one of the vanquished ? had he been 
taken prisoner and shut up in the tower ? and had he, 
to while away the long and tiresome days, written on the 
wall of his dungeon the melancholy resume of his life and 
of that of all mankind 

" Ce que V homme commence pour lui, Dieu Vacheve pour 
les autres ? " 

At five o'clock next morning, alone, and comfortably 
seated on the banquette of the diligence Van Gend, I left 
la France by the route of Namur. We proceeded by the 
only chain of mountains of which Belgium can boast ; for 
the Meuse, by continuing to flow in opposition to the 
abaissement of the plateau of Ardennes, succeeded in 
forming a plain which is now called Flanders a plain 
to which nature has refused mountains for its protection, 
but which man has studded with fortresses. 

After an ascension of half an hour, the horses became 
fatigued, the conducteur thirsty, and they (I might say 
we), with one accord, stopped before a small wine-shop, 
in a poor but picturesque village, built on the two sides 
of a ravine cut through the mountains. This ravine, which 
is at one time the bed of a torrent, and at another the 
leading street of the village, is paved with the granite of 
the surrounding mountains. When we were passing, six 
harnessed horses proceeded, or rather climbed, along 
that strange and frightfully steep street, drawing after 
them a large empty vehicle with four wheels. If it 
had been laden, I am persuaded that it would have re- 



A PEASANT -GIRL 43 

quired twenty horses to have drawn it. I can in no way 
account for the use of such carriages in this ravine, if they 
are not meant to serve as sketches for young Dutch paint- 
ers, whom we meet here and there upon the road a 
bag upon their back, and a stick in their hand. 

What can a person do on the outside of a coach but 
gaze at all that comes within his view. I could not be 
better situated for such a purpose. Before me was the 
greater portion of the valley of the Meuse ; to the south 
were the two Givets, graciously linked by their bridge ; 
to the west was the tower of Egmont, half in ruins, 
which was casting behind it an immense shadow ; to the 
north were the sombre trenches into which the Meuse 
was emptying itself, from whence a light blue vapour 
was arising. On turning my head, my eyes fell upon a 
handsome peasant-girl, who was sitting by the open win- 
dows of a cottage, dressing herself; and above the hut of 
the paysanne, but almost lost to view, were the formida- 
ble batteries of Charlemont, which crowned the frontiers of 
France. 

Whilst I was contemplating this coup d'ceil, the pea- 
ant girl lifted her eyes, and on perceiving me, she smiled ; 
saluted me graciously ; then, without shutting the window 
or appearing disconcerted, she continued her toilette. 




LETTER VI 

THE BANKS OF THE MEUSE DINANT NAMUR. 

The Lesse. A Flemish Garden. The Mannequin. The Tombstone. 
Athletic Demoiselles. Signboards and their utility. 

HAVE just arrived at Liege. The route 
from Givet, following the course of the 
Meuse, is highly picturesque; and it 
strikes me as singular that so little has 
been said of the banks of this river, for 
they are truly beautiful and romantic. 

After passing the cabin of the peasant-girl, the road is 
full of windings, and during a walk of three quarters of 
an hour we are in a thick forest, interspersed with ra- 
vines and torrents. Then a long plain intervenes, at the 
extremity of which is a frightful yawning a tremendous 
precipice upwards of three hundred feet in depth. At 
the foot of the precipice, amidst the brambles which bor- 
der it, the Meuse is seen meandering peacefully, and on 
its banks is a chdtelet resembling a patisserie manie- 
ree, or time-piece, of the days of Louis the Fifteenth, 
with its decorated walls, and its Lilliputian and fantastical 



GROTTO OF HANSUB J.ESSE. 45 

garden. Nothing is more singularly striking and more 
ridiculous than this the petty work of man, surrounded 
by Nature in all her sublimity. One is apt to say that it 
is a shocking demonstration of the bad taste of man, 
brought into contrast with the sublime poetry of God. 

After the gulf, the plain begins again, for the ravine 
of the Meuse divides it as the rut of a wheel cuts the 
ground. 

About a quarter of a league further on, the road be- 
comes very steep, and leads abruptly to the river. The 
declivity here is charming. Vine-branches encircle the 
hawthorn, and crowd both sides of the road. The Meuse 
at this spot is straight, green in appearance, and runs to 
the left between two banks thickly studded with trees. A 
bridge is next seen, then another river, smaller yet equally 
beautiful, which empties itself into the Meuse. It is the 
Lesse ; three leagues from which, in a cavity on the 
right, is the famed grotto of Hansur Lesse. 

On turning the road, a huge pyramidical rock, sharp- 
ened like the spire of a cathedral, suddenly appears. The 
conducteur told me that it was the Roche a Bazard. The 
road passes between the mountain and this colossal borne , 
then turns again, and at the foot of an enormous block of 
granite, crowned with a citadel, a church and a long 
street of old houses meet the eye. It is Dinant. 

We stopped here about a quarter of an hour, and ob- 
served a little garden in the diligence-yard, which is suf- 
ficient to warn the traveller that he is in Flanders. The 
flowers in it are very pretty : in the midst are two painted 
statues, the one represents a woman, or rather a manne- 
quin, for it is clothed in an Indian gown, with an old silk 



46 THE MEU8E. 

hat. On approaching, an indistinct noise strikes the ear, 
and a strange spurting of water is perceived under her 
dress. We then discover that this female is a fountain. 

After leaving Dinant, the valley extends, and the 
Meuse gradually widens. On the right hand of the river 
the ruins of two ancient castles present themselves ; the 
rocks are now only to be seen here and there under a rich 
covering of verdure ; and a housse of green velours, bor- 
dered with flowers, covers the face of the country. 

On this side are hop -fields, orchards, and trees bur- 
dened with fruit ; on that, the laden vine is ever appear- 
ing, amongst whose leaves the feathery tribe are joyously 
revelling. Here the cackling of ducks is heard, there 
the chuckling of hens. Young girls, their arms naked 
to the shoulder, are seen laughingly walking along with 
loaded baskets on their heads ; and from time to time a 
village churchyard meets the eye, contrasting strangely 
with the neighbouring road so full of joy, of beauty, and 
of life. 

In one of those churchyards, whose dilapidated walls 
leave exposed to view the tall grass, green and bloom- 
ing, mocking, as it were, the once vain mortal that 
moulders beneath, I read on a tombstone the follow- 
ing inscription : 

"O PIE, DEFUNCTIS MISERIS SUCCURRE, VIATOR!" 

No memento ever had such an effect upon me as this one. 
Ordinarily, the dead warn there they supplicate. 

After passing a hill, where the rocks, sculptured by 
the rain, resemble the half- worn and blackened stones of 
the old fountain of Luxembourg, we begin to perceive 



NAMUR. 47 

our near approach to Namur. Gentlemen's country seats 
begin to mix with the abodes of peasants, and the villa is 
no sooner passed than we come to a village. 

The diligence stopped at one of these places, where I 
had on one side a garden well ornamented with colon- 
nades and Ionic temples ; on the other, a cabaret, at the 
door of which a number of men and women were drink- 
ing ; and to the right, upon a pedestal of white marble, 
veined by the shadows of the branches, a Venus de Me- 
dicis, half hid among leaves, as if ashamed to be seen, 
by a group of peasants, in a state of nakedness. 

A few steps further on were two or three good-look- 
ing athletic wenches perched upon a plum-tree of consi- 
derable height, one of them in such a delicate attitude, 
and so perfectly regardless of those underneath, that she 
gave many of the travellers in the Imperial a somewhat 
vague desire to alight. 

About an hour afterwards we arrived at Namur, which 
is situated near the junction of the Sombre and the Meuse. 
The women are pretty, and the men are handsome, and they 
have something pleasing and affable in the cast of their 
countenances. As to the town itself, there is nothing re- 
markable in it ; nor has it anything in its general appear- 
ance which speaks of its antiquity. There are no monu- 
ments, no architecture, no edifices worthy of notice ; in 
fact, Namur can boast of nothing but mean -looking 
churches and fountains of the mauvais gout of Louis XV. 
The town is crowned, gloomily and sadly, by the citadel. 
However, I must say that I looked upon these fortifica- 
tions with a feeling of respect, for they had once the ho- 
nour of being attacked byVauban and defended by Cohorn. 



48 UTILITY OF SIGNBOARDS. 

Wherever there are no churches, I always amuse my- 
self by reading the signs ; for the names of the bourgeois, 
almost as important to study as those of the nobility, ap- 
pear above their doors in the most naive form. 

These three names, taken almost at random from the 
shops at Namur, have in them separate significations 
L'Epouse, Debar sy, Negociante. In reading these we 
feel assured that we are in a town which belonged to the 
French to-day, to the foreigner to -morrow, and, next day, 
again to the French ; a town where the language is changed, 
and has become insensibly denatures French words linked 
with German awkwardness, into phrases. Crucifex Piret, 
mercier this speaks of the Catholic religion of Flanders ; 
for there is not such a name in all France. Menendez- 
Wodon, horloger a Castilian and a Flemish name joined 
by a hyphen. Is not this the domination of Spain over 
the Pays-Bas, written, attested, and related in a proper 
name ? Thus these three express the general features of 
the country : the first tells the language, the second the 
religion, and the last the history. 



LETTER VII. 



THE BANKS OF THE MEUSE HUY LIEGE. 

A chapel of the tenth century. Iron-works of Mr. Cockerill ; their 
singular appearance. Saint Paul's at Liege. Palace of the Ecclesias- 
tical Princes of Liege. Significant decorations of a room at Liege. 

N leaving Namur we enter a mag- 
nificent avenue of trees, whose foliage 
serves to hide from our view the town, 
with its mean and uncouth steeples, 
which, seen at a distance, have a gro- 
tesque and singular appearance. After 
passing those fine trees, the fresh breeze from the Meuse 
reaches us, and the road begins to wend cheerfully along 
the river-side. The Meuse widens by the junction of the 
Sombre, the valley extends, and the double walls of rocks 
reappear, resembling, now and then, Cyclop fortresses, 
great dungeons in ruins, and vast Titaniques towers. 

The rocks of the Meuse contain a great quantity of 
iron. When viewed in the landscape, they are of a beau- 
tiful colour ; but broken, they change into that odious 
greyish-blue which pervades all Belgium. What is mag- 




50 HUT. 

nificent in mountains loses its grandeur when broken and 
converted into houses. 

" It is God who formed the rocks ; man is the builder 
of habitations." 

We passed hastily through a little village called San- 
son, near which stand the ruins of a castle, built, it is said, 
in the days of Clodion. The rocks at this place represent 
the face of a man, to which the conducteur never fails to 
direct the attention of the traveller. We then came to the 
Ardennes, where I observed what would be highly appre - 
ciated by antiquaries a little rustic church, still entire, 
of the tenth century. In another village (I think it is 
Sclayen) we saw the following inscription, in large cha- 
racters, above the principal door of the church : 

" LKS CHIENS HORS DK LA MAISON DE DIKU." 

If I were the worthy curate, I should deem it more im- 
portant for men to enter than dogs to go out. 

After passing the Ardennes, the mountains become 
scattered, and the Meuse, no longer running by the road- 
side, crosses among prairies. The country is still beauti- 
ful, but the cJiemin'ee de I'usine that sad obelisk of our 
civilisation industriette, too often strikes the eye. The 
road again joins the river : we perceive vast fortifications, 
like eagles' nests, perched upon rocks ; a fine church of 
the fourteenth century ; and an old bridge with seven 
arches. We are at Huy. 

Huy and Dinant are the prettiest towns upon the 
Meuse ; the former about half-way between Namur and 
Liege, the latter half-way between Namur and Givet. 
Huy, which is at present a redoubtable citadel, was in 
former times a warlike commune, and held out with valour 



LITTLE FLEMALLE. 51 

a siege with Liege, as Dinant did with Namur. In those 
heroic times, cities, as kingdoms now, were always de- 
claring war against each other. 

After leaving Huy, we from time to time see on the 
banks of the river a zinc manufactory, which, from its 
blackened aspect and smoke escaping through the cre- 
viced roofs, appears to us as if a fire were breaking out, or 
like a house after a fire had been nearly extinguished. By 
the side of a bean-field, in the perfume of a little garden, 
a brick house, with a slate turret, the vine clinging to its 
walls, doves on the roof, and cages at the windows, strikes 
the eye we then think of Teniers and of Mieris. 

The shades of evening approached the wind ceased 
blowing, the trees rustling and nothing was heard but 
the rippling of the water. The lights in the adjacent 
houses burnt dimly, and all objects were becoming ob- 
scured. The passengers yawned, and said, " we shall be 
at Liege in an hour." At this moment a singular sight sud- 
denly presented itself. At the foot of the hills, which were 
scarcely perceptible, two round balls of fire glared like 
the eyes of tigers. By the road-side was a frightful chan- 
delier, twenty-four feet in height, surmounted by a 
flame, which cast a sombre hue upon the adjoining rocks, 
forests, and ravines. Nearer the entry of the valley, hid- 
den in the shade, was a mouth of live coal, which sud- 
denly opened and shut, and, in the midst of frightful 
noises, spouted forth a tongue of fire. It was the light- 
ing of the furnaces. 

After passing the place called Little Flemalle, the sight 
was inexpressible was truly magnificent. All the valley 
seemed to be in a state of conflagration smoke issuing 

p2 

LIBRARY 

ILLINOIS 



52 LIEGE. 

from this place, and flames arising from that ; in fact, we 
could imagine that a hostile army had ransacked the 
country, and that twenty districts presented, in that 
night of darkness, all the aspects and phases of a con- 
flagrationsome kindling, some enveloped in smoke, and 
others surrounded with flames. 

This aspect of war is caused by peace this frightful 
symbol of devastation is the effect of industry. The fur- 
naces of the iron- works of Mr. Cockerill, where cannon is 
cast of the largest calibre, and steam- engines of the high- 
est power are made, alone meet the eye. 

A wild and violent noise comes from this chaos of in- 
dustry. I had the curiosity to approach one of these 
frighful places, and I could not help admiring the assi- 
duity of the workmen. It was a prodigious spectacle, to 
which the solemnity of the hour lent a supernatural 
aspect. Wheels, saws, boilers, cylinders, scales all those 
monstrous implements that are called machines, and to 
which steam gives a frightful and noisy life rattle, grind, 
shriek, hiss ; and at times, when the blackened work- 
men thrust them into the water, they moan like that 
of hydras and dragons when tormented in hell by de- 
mons. 

Liege is one of those old towns which are in a fair way 
of becoming new deplorable transformation ! one of 
those towns where things of antiquity are disappearing, 
leaving in their places white fa9ades, enriched with 
painted statues ; where the good old buildings, with 
slated roofs, skylight windows, chiming bells, belfries, 
and weathercocks, are falling into decay, while gazed at 



LIEGE. 53 

with horror by some thick-headed citizen, who is busy 
with a Constitutionnel, reading what he does not under- 
stand, yet pompous with the supposed knowledge which 
he has attained. The Octroi, a Greek temple, represents 
a castle flanked with towers, and thick set with pikes ; 
and the long stalls of the furnaces supply the place of the 
elegant steeples of the churches. The ancient city was, 
perhaps, noisy ; the modern one is productive of smoke. 

Liege has no longer the enormous cathedral of the 
princes-Svdques, built by the illustrious Bishop Notger in 
the year 1000, and demolished in 1795 by no one can 
tell whom ; but it can boast of the iron-works of Mr. 
Cockerill. 

Neither has it any longer the convent of Dominicans 
sombre cloister of high fame ! noble edifice of fine archi- 
tecture ! but there is a theatre exactly on the same spot, 
decorated with pillars and brass capitals, where operas 
are performed. 

Liege in the nineteenth century is what it was in the 
sixteenth. It vies with France in implements of war, 
with Versailles in extravagance of arms. But the old 
city of Saint Hubert, with its church and fortress, its 
ecclesiastic and military commute, has ceased to be a city 
of prayer and of war ; it is one of buying and selling an 
immense hive of industry. It has been transformed into 
a rich commercial centre ; has put one of its arms 
in France, the other in Holland, and is incessantly taking 
from the one and receiving from the other. 

Everything has been changed in this city; even its 
etymology has not escaped. The ancient stream Legia 
bears now the appellation of Ri-de-Coq Fontaine. 



54 CHURCHES AT LIEGE. 

Notwithstanding, we must admit that Liege is gra- 
ciously situated near the green brow of the mountain of 
Sainte VValburge ; is divided by the Meuse into lower and 
upper towns ; is interspersed with thirteen bridges, some 
of which have rather an architectural appearance ; and is 
surrounded with trees, hills, and prairies. It has turrets, 
clocks, and portes-donjons, like that of Saint Martin and 
Amerrcceur, to excite the poet or the antiquary, even 
though he be startled with the noise, the smoke, and the 
flames of the manufactories around. 

As it rained heavily, I only visited four churches : 
SAINT PAUL'S, the actuelle cathedral, is a noble building 
of the fifteenth century, having a Gothic cloister, with a 
charming portail of the Renaissance, and surmounted by 
a belfry, which, had it not been that some inapt architect 
of our day spoiled all the angles, would be considered 
elegant. SAINT JEAN, a grave fa9ade of the sixteenth 
century, consisting of a large square steeple, with 
a smaller one on each side. SAINT HUBERT is rather a 
superior-looking building, whose lower galleries are of 
an excellent ordre. SAINT DENIS, a curious church 
of the tenth century, with a large steeple of the eleventh. 
That steeple bears traces of having been injured by 
fire. It was probably burnt during the Norman out- 
break. The Roman architecture has been ingeniously 
repaired, and the steeple finished in brick. This is per- 
fectly discernible, and has a most singular effect. 

As I was going from Saint Denis to Saint Hubert by a 
labyrinth of old narrow streets, ornamented here and 
there with madones, I suddenly came within view of a 
large dark stone wall, and on close observation discovered 



PALACE OF THE ECCLESIASTIC PRINCES. 55 

that the back fa9ade indicated that it was a palace of the 
middle age. An obscure door presented itself; I entered, 
and at the expiration of a few moments found myself in 
a vast yard, which turned out to be that of the Palace of 
the Ecclesiastic Princes of Liege. The ensemble of the 
architecture is, perhaps, the most gloomy and noble -look- 
ing that I ever saw. 

There are four lofty granite fa9ades, surmounted by 
four prodigious slate roofs, with the same number of gal- 
leries. Two of these fa9ades, which are perfectly entire, 
present the admirable adjustment of ogives and arches 
which characterized the end of the fifteenth century and 
the beginning of the sixteenth. The windows of this 
clerical palace have meneaux like those of a church. Un- 
fortunately the two other fa9ades, which were destroyed 
by fire in 1734, have been rebuilt in the pitiful style of 
that epoch, and tend to detract from the general effect. 
It is now 105 years since the last bishop occupied this 
fine structure. 

The quadruple gallery that walls the yard is admira- 
bly preserved. There is nothing more pleasing to study 
than the pillars upon which the large ogives are placed : 
they are of gray granite, like the rest of the palace. 
Whilst examining the four rows, the one-half of the shaft 
of the pillar disappears, sometimes at the top, then at the 
bottom, under a rich swelling of arabesques. The swell- 
ing is doubled in the west range of the pillars, and the 
stalk disappears entirely. This speaks only of the Flem- 
ish caprice of the sixteenth century ; but what perplexes 
us is, that the chapiters of these pillars, decorated with 
heads, foliage, apocalyptical figures, dragons, and hiero- 




56 PALACE OF THE ECCLESIASTIC PRINCES. 

glyphics, seem to belong to the architecture of the 
eleventh ; and it must be remembered that the palace of 
Liege was commenced in 1508, by Prince Erard de la 
Mark, who reigned thirty- two years. 

This grave edifice is at 
present a court of jus- 
tice: booksellers' and 
toy-merchants' shops 
are under all the 
arches, and vegetable 
gi stalls in the court- 
yard. The black 
robes of the law prac- 
titioners are seen in the midst of baskets of red and 
green cabbages. Groups of Flemish merchants, some 
merry, others morose, make fun and quarrel before each 
pillar ; irritated pleaders appear from all the windows ; 
and in that sombre yard, formerly solitary and tranquil 
as a convent, of which it has the appearance, the untired 
tongue of the advocate mingles with the chatter, the 
noise, and bavardage of the buyers and sellers. 

Above the roof of the palace there is a high and mas- 
sive square turret, built of brick, which was in former 
times the belfry. It is now converted into a prison for 
those of the fair sex who come under the appellation of 
filles publiques. 

On leaving the palace I contemplated the actuelle fa- 
fade. A man, addressed me, and wishing to excite my 
interest, informed me that in Holland Liege was called 
Luik, in German Luttich, and in Latin Leodium. 

My room at Liege was ornamented with muslin cur- 



INSCRIPTION. 57 

tains, upon which were embroidered not nosegays, but 
melons. There were also several pictures, representing 
the triumph of the Allies and our disasters in 1814. Be- 
hold the legende printed at the bottom of one of these 
paintings : 

" Battle of Arcis-sur-Aube, 21st March, 1814. The 
greater portion of the garrison of this place, composed of 
the garde ancienne, were taken prisoners, and the Allies, 
on the 22nd of April, triumphantly entered Paris." 




LETTER VIII. 

THE BANKS OF THE VESDBE. VERVIERS. 

Railways. Miners at work. Louis the Fourteenth. 

ESTERDA Y morning, as the diligence 
was about to leave Liege for Aix-la- 
Chapelle, a worthy citizen annoyed the 
passengers by refusing to take the 
W seat upon the imperiale, which the 
conductor pointed out as his. For the sake of peace I 
offered him mine, which the condescending traveller, with- 
out evincing any reluctance, or even thanking me, ac- 
cepted, and the heavy vehicle forthwith rolled tardily along. 
I was pleased with the change. The road, though no 
longer by the banks of the Meuse, but by those of the 
Vesdre, is exceedingly beautiful. 

The Vesdre is rapid, and runs through Venders and 
Chauffontaines, along the most charming valley in the 
world. In August, especially if the day be fine, with a 
blue sky over our heads we have either a ravine or a 
garden, and certainly always a paradise. From the road 



RAILWAYS. 59 

the river is ever in sight. It at one time passes through 
a pleasing village, at another it skirts an old castle, with 
square turrets : there the country suddenly changes its 
aspect, and on turning by a hill-side the eye discovers, 
through an opening in a thick tuft of trees, a low house 
with a huge wheel by its side. It is a water-mill. 

Between Chauffontaines and Verviers the valley is full 
of charms, and the weather being propitious added much 
to enliven the scene. Marmosets were playing upon the 
garden-steps ; the breeze was shaking the leaves of the 
tall poplars, and sounded like the music of peace, the 
harmony of nature ; handsome heifers, in groups of three 
and four, were shaded by leafy blinds from the rays of 
the sun, and were reposing on the greensward ; then, far 
from all houses, and alone, a fine cow, worthy of the 
regards of Argus, was peacefully grazing. The soft notes 
of a flute floating on the breeze were distinctly heard. 

" Mercurius septem mulcet arundinibus." 

The railway that colossale entreprise, which runs from 
Anvers to Liege, and is being extended to Verviers is 
cut through the solid rock, and runs along the valley. 
Here we meet a bridge, there a viaduct ; and at times 
we see in the distance, at the foot of an immense rock, a 
group of dark objects, resembling a hillock of ants, busily 
blasting the solid granite. 

These ants, small though they be, perform the work of 
giants. 

When the fissure is wide and deep, a strange sound 
proceeds from the interior : in fact, one might imagine 
that the rock is making known its grievances by the 



60 VERVIERS. 

mouth which man has made. Our diligence suddenly 
stopped, on seeing the workmen, who were upon a rising 
ground, flying in all directions: a noise louder than 
thunder was heard, which was echoed by the adjacent 
rocks and mountains. It was the miners who were at 
work. For a few hours afterwards the passengers did 
nothing but speak of accidents that are always taking 
place that, no further back than yesterday, a man was 
killed and a tree cut in two by a block of stone which 
weighed twenty thousand pounds ; and that, the day 
before, the wife of one of the workmen, while carry- 
ing coffee to her husband, was killed in the same man- 
ner. This has a tendency to spoil the idylle. 

Venders is an insignificant little town, divided into 
three quartiers, called Chick- Chack, Brasse-Crotte, and 
Dardanelle. In passing, I observed a little urchin, about 
six years of age, who, seated upon a door- step, was smok- 
ing his pipe, with all the magisterial air of a Grand Turk, 
The marmot fumeur looked into my face, and burst into a 
fit of laughter, which made me conclude that my appear- 
ance was to him rather ridiculous. 

After Verviers, the road skirts the Vesdre as far as 
Simbourg: Simbourg that town of counts, that pate 
which Louis XIV. found had a crust rather hard for mas 
tication is at present a dismantled fortress. 



LETTER 



AIX-LA-CHAPE1.LE THE TOMB OF CHARLEMAGNE. 

Chapel. Legend of the Wolf and Pine-apple. Carlo Magno. Barbe- 
rousse. The untombing of Charlemagne. Exhibition of relics. 
Arm-chair of Charlemagne. The Swiss Guide. H6tel-de-Ville, the 
birthplace of Charlemagne. Aix-la-Chapelle in the distance. 




OR an invalid, Aix-la-Chapelle is a 
mineral fountain warm, cold, irony, 
and sulphureous ; for the tourist, it is a 
place for redoubts and concerts ; for 
the pilgrim, the place of relics, where 
the gown of the Virgin Mary, the blood of Jesus, the 
cloth which enveloped the head of John the Baptist after 
his decapitation, are exhibited every seven years ; for the 
antiquarian chronicler, it is a noble abbey of filles a ab- 
besse, connected with the male convent, which was built 
by Saint Gregory, son of Nicephore, Emperor of the East ; 
for the hunter, it is the ancient valley of the wild boars, 
(Porcetum) ; for the merchant, it is afabrique of cloth, 
needles, and pins ; and for him who is neither merchant, 

G 



62 LEGEND OF THE WOLF 

manufacturer, hunter, antiquary, pilgrim, tourist, nor 
invalid, it is the city of Charlemagne. 

In fact, Charlemagne was born at Aix-la-Chapelle, 
and died there. He was born in the old palace, of which 
there now only remains the tower, and he was buried in 
the church that he founded in 796, two years after the 
death of his wife Frastrada. Leon the Third consecrated 
it in 804, and tradition says that two bishops of Ton- 
gres, who were buried at Maestricht, left their graves, in 
order to complete, at that ceremony, the three hundred 
and sixty-five bishops and archbishops representing the 
days of the year. 

This historical and legendary church, from which the 
town has taken its name, has undergone, during the last 
thousand years, many transformations. 

No sooner had I entered Aix than I went to the 
chapel. 

The portail, built of grey-blue granite/is of the time of 
Louis the Fifteenth, with doors of the eighth century. 
To the right of the portail, a large bronze ball, like a 
pine-apple, is placed upon a granite pillar ; and on the 
opposite side, on another pillar, is a wolf, of the same 
metal, which is half turned towards the bystanders, its 
mouth open and its teeth displayed. Permit me, my friend, 
to give you a brief explanation of the legend of the wolf 
and pine-apple. This is the legend daily recited by the old 
women of the place to the inquiring traveller : 

" A long time, a very long time ago, the good people 
of Aix-la-Chapelle wished to build a church : money was 
put aside for the purpose ; the foundation \vas laid, the 
walls were built, and the timber- work was commenced. 



AND THE PINE-APPLE. 63 

For six months there was nothing heard but a deafening 
noise of saws, hammers, and axes; but at the expiration 
of that period the money ran short. A call was made 
upon the pilgrims for assistance ; a tin plate was placed 
at the door of the church, but scarcely a Hard was col- 
lected. What was to be done ? The senate assembled, 
and proposed, argued, advised, and consulted. The 
workmen refused to continue their labour. The grass, 
the brambles, the ivy, and all the other insolent weeds 
which surround ruins, clang to the new stones of the 
abandoned edifice. Was there no other alternative than 
that of discontinuing the church ? The glorious senate of 
burgomasters were in a state of consternation. 

" One day, in the midst of their discussions, a strange 
man, of tall stature and respectable appearance, entered. 

" ' Good day, gentlemen. What is the subject of dis- 
cussion ? You seem bewildered . Ah, I suppose your 
church weighs heavy at your hearts. You do not know 
how to finish it. People say that money is the chief re- 
quisite for its completion.' 

" ' Stranger/ said one of the senate, ' allez vous en an 
diable ? It would take a million of money.' 

" There is a million,' said the unnkown, opening the 
window, and pointing to a chariot drawn by oxen, and 
guarded by twenty negroes armed to the teeth. 

" One of the burgomasters went with the stranger to 
the carriage, took the first sack that came to his hand, 
then both returned. It was laid before the senate, and 
found to be full of gold. 

" The bourgomestres looked with eyes expressive both of 
foolishness and surprise, and demanded of the inconnu 

G2 



64 LEGEND OF THE WOLF 

" ' Who are you, sir ? ' 

" ' My dear fellows, I am the man who has money at 
command. What more do you require ? I inhabit the Black 
Forest, near the lake of Wildsee, and not far from the ruins 
of Heidensladt, the ciiy of Pagans. I possess mines of gold 
and sil/er, and at night I handle millions of precious 
stones. But I have strange faucies hi fact, I am 
unhappy, a melancholy being, passing my days in gazing 
into the transparent lake, watching the tourniquet and 
the water Tiitons, anJ obsjrving the growth of the 
polygonum amphibium among the rjcks. But a truce to 
questions and idle stories. I have opened my heart, 
profit by it ! There is yoar million of money. Will you 
accept it ? ' 

" ' Pardieu, oui,' said the senate ' Wo shall finish our 
church.' 

" * Well, it is yours,' the stranger said ; ' but remem- 
ber there is a condition.' 

'"What is it?' 

" * Finish your church, gentlemen take all this pre- 
cious metal ; but promise me, in exchange, the first soul 
that enters into the church on the day of its consecration.' 

" ' You are the devil ! ' cried the senate. 

" * You are imbeciles,' replied Urian. 

" The burgomasters began to cross themselves, to 
turn pale, and tremble ; but Urian, who was a queer 
fellow, shook the bag containing the gold, laughed till 
he almost split his sides, and, soon gaining the confidence 
of the worthy gentlemen, a negotiation took place. The 
devil is a clever fellow, that is the reason that he is a 
devil. 



AND THE PINE-APPLE. 65 

" ' After all,' he said, ' I am the one who shall lose by 
the bargain. You shall have your million and your 
church : as for me, I shall only have a soul.' 

" ' Whose soul, sir ? ' demanded the frightened senate. 

" ' The first one that comes that, perhaps, of some 
canting hypocrite, who, to appear devout, and to show 
his zeal in the cause, will enter first. But, bourgomestres, 
my friends, your church bids fair. The plan pleases me ; 
and the edifice, in my opinion, will be superb. I see 
with pleasure that your architect prefers the trompe-sous- 
le-coin to that of Montpellier. I do not dislike the arched 
vault, but still I would have preferred a ridged one. I 
acknowledge that he has made the door-way very taste- 
fully ; but I am not sure if he has been careful about the 
thickness of theparpain. What is the name of your ar- 
chitect ? Tell him from me, that, to make a door well, 
there must be four panels. Nevertheless, the church is 
of a very good style, and well adjusted. It would be a 
pity to leave off what has been so well begun. You must 
finish your church. Come, my friends ; the million for 
you the soul for me. Is it not so ? ' 

" ' After all,' thought the citizens, 'we ought to be 
satisfied that he contents himself with one soul. He might, 
if he observed attentively, find that there is scarcely one 
in the whole place that does not belong to him.' 

" The bargain was concluded the million was locked 
up Urian disappeared in a blue flame and two years 
afterwards the church was finished. 

" You must know that all the senators took an oath to 
keep the transaction a profound secret ; and it must also 
be understood that each of them on the very same even- 



66 LEGEND OF THE WOLF 

ing related the affair to his wife. When the church was 
complete, the whole town thanks to the wives of the se- 
nators knew the secret of the senate ; and no one would 
enter the church. This was an embarrassment greater 
even than the first : the church was erected, but no one 
would enter ; it was finished, but it was empty. What 
good was a church of this description ? 

"The senate assembled, but they could do nothing; 
and they called upon the Bishop of Tongres, but he was 
equally puzzled. The canons of the church were con- 
sulted ; but to no avail. At last the monks were brought 
in. 

" ' Pardieu,' said one of them ; ' you seem to stand at 
trifles ; you owe Urian the first soul that passes the door 
of the church ; but he did not stipulate as to the kind of 
soul. I assure you, this Urian is at best an ass. Gen- 
tlemen, after a severe struggle, a wolf was taken alive in 
the valley of Borcette. Make it enter the church. Urian 
must be contented ; he shall have a soul, although 
only that of a wolf.' 

<l ' Bravo ! bravo ! ' shouted the senate. 

" At the dawn of the following day the bells rang. 

" * What ! ' cried the inhabitants' to-day is the con- 
secration of the church, but who will dare to enter first ? ' 

" ' I won't ! ' shouted one. ' Nor I ! ' ' Nor 1 ! ' es- 
caped from the lips of the others. 

" At last the senate and the chapitre arrived, followed 
by men carrying the wolf in a cage. A signal was given 
to open the door of the church and that of the cage 
simultaneously ; the wolf, half mad from fright, rushed 
into the empty church, where Urian was waiting, his 



AND THE PINE-APPLE. 67 

mouth open, and his eyes shut. Judge of his rage when 
he discovered that he had swallowed a wolf. He shouted 
tremendously, flew for some time under the high arches, 
making a noise like a tempest, and, on going out, gave 
the door a furious kick, that rent it from top to bottom." 

It is upon that account, say the old dames, that a sta- 
tue of the wolf has been placed on the left side of the 
church, and an apple, which represents its poor soul, on 
the right. 

I must add, before finishing the legend, that I looked 
for the rent made by the heel of the devil, but could not 
find it. 

On approaching the chapel by the great portail the 
eifect is not striking ; the facade displays the different 
styles of architecture Roman, Gothic, and modern, 
without order, and consequently, without grandeur ; but 
if, on the contrary, we arrive at the chapel by the Chevet, 
the result is otherwise. The high abside of the fourteenth 
century, in all its boldness and beauty with its angular 
roof, the rich workmanship of its balustrades, the variety 
of its gargomlles, the sombre hue of the stones, and its 
large, transparent windows strikes the beholder witii 
admiration. 

Here, nevertheless, the aspect of the church imposing 
though it is will be found far from uniform. Between 
the abside and the portail, in a kind of cavity, the dome 
of Otho III., built over the tomb of Charlemagne in the 
tenth century, is hid from view. After a few moments' 
contemplation, a singular awe comes over us when gazing 
at this extraordinary edifice an edifice which, like the 
great work that Charlemagne began, remains unfinished ; 



68 TOMB OF CHARLEMAGNE. 

and which, like his empire that spoke all languages, is 
composed of architecture that represents all styles. To 
the reflective, there is a strange analogy between this 
wonderful man and this great building. 

After having passed the arched roof of the portico, and 
left behind me the antique bronze doors surmounted with 
lions' heads, a white rotundo of two stories, in which all 
the fantaisies of architecture are displayed, attracted my 
attention. On casting my eyes upon the ground, I per- 
ceived a large block of dark marble, with the following 
inscription in brass letters : 

" CAROLO MAGNO." 

Nothing is more contemptible than to see, exposed to 
view, the bastard graces that surround this great Carlo - 
vingian name : angels resembling distorted Cupids, palm- 
branches like coloured feathers, garlands of flowers, and 
knots of ribbons, are placed under the dome of Otho 
III., and upon the tomb of Charlemagne. 

The only thing here that evinces respect to the shade 
of that great man is an immense lamp, twelve feet in 
diameter, with forty-eight burners; which was presented, 
in the twelfth century, by Barberousse. It is of brass, 
gilt with gold, has the form of a crown, and is suspended 
from the ceiling above the marble stone by an iron chain 
about seventy feet in length. 

It is evident that some other monument had been 
erected to Charlemagne. There is nothing to convince 
us that this marble, bordered with brass, is of antiquity. 
As to the letters, " CAROLO MAGNO," they are not of a 
later date than 1 730. 

Charlemagne is no longer under this stone. In 1166 



KELICS OF CHARLEMAGNE. 69 

Frederick Barberousse whose gift, magnificent though 
it was, does by no means compensate for his sacrilege 
caused the remains of the great emperor to be untombed. 
The Church claimed the imperial skeleton, and, separat- 
ing the bones, made each a holy relic. In the adjoining 
sacristy, a vicar shows the people for three francs se- 
venty-five centimes the fixed price the arm of Charle- 
magne that arm which held for a time the reins of the 
world. Venerable relic ! which has the following inscrip- 
tion, written by some scribe of the twelfth century : 
"BRACHICM SANCTI CAROLI MAGNI." 

After that, I saw the skull of Charlemagne, that cra- 
nium which may be said to have been the mould of a new 
Europe, and which a beadle had the effrontery to strike 
with his finger. 

All are kept in a wooden armory, with a few angels, 
similar to those I have just mentioned, on the top. Such 
is the tomb of that man whose memory has outlived ten 
ages, and who, by his greatness, has shed the rays of im- 
mortality around his name. Sanctus, magnus, belong to 
him two of the most august epithets which this earth 
could bestow upon a human being. 

There is one thing astonishing that is, the largeness 
of the skull and arm. Charlemagne was, in fact, colossal 
with respect to size of body as well as extraordinary 
mental endowments. The son of Pepin-le-Bref was in 
body, as in mind, gigantic ; of great corporeal strength, 
and of astounding intellect. 

An inspection of this armory has a strange effect upon 
the antiquary. Besides the skull and arm, it contains the 



70 RELICS OF CHARLEMAGNE. 

heart of Charlemagne ; the cross which the emperor had 
round his neck in his tomb ; a handsome ostensoir of the 
Renaissance, given by Charles the Fifth, and spoiled, in 
the last century, by tasteless ornaments ; fourteen richly 
sculptured gold plates, which once ornamented the arm- 
chair of the emperor ; an ostensoir, given by Philippe the 
Second ; the cord which bound our Saviour ; the sponge 
which was used upon the cross ; the girdle of the Holy 
Virgin, and that of the Redeemer. 

In the midst of innumerable ornaments, heaped up in 
the armory like mountains of gold and precious stones, 
are two shrines of singular beauty. One, the oldest, which 
is seldom opened ; contains the remainder of the bones 
of Charlemagne, and the other, of the twelfth cen- 
tury, which Frederick Barberousse gave to the church, 
holds the relics, which are exhibited every seven years. A 
single exhibition of this shrine, in 1496, attracted 42,000 
pilgrims, and drew, in ten days, 80,000 florins. 

This shrine has only one key, which is in two pieces ; 
the one is in the possession of the chapitre. the other in 
that of the magistrate of the town. Sometimes it is 
opened on extraordinary occasions, such as on the visit of 
a monarch. The present King of Prussia, when Prince 
Royal, expressed a desire to have it opened, which was 
not acceded to. 

In a small armory, adjoining the one mentioned, I saw 
an exact imitation of the Germanic crown of Charle- 
magne. That which he wore as Emperor of Germany is 
at Vienna ; the one, as King of France, at Rheims ; and 
the other, as King of Lombardy, is at Menza, near Milan. 

On going out of the sacristy, the beadle gave orders to 



ARM-CHAIR OP CHARLEMAGNE. 7 

one of the menials, a Swiss, to show me the interior of 
the chapel. The first object that fixed my attention was 
the pulpit, presented by the Emperor Heary the Second, 
which is extravagantly ornamented and gilt, in the 
style of the eleventh century. To the right of the altar, 
the heart of M. Antoine Berdolet, the first and last 
Bishop of Aix-la-Chapelle, is encased. That church 
had but one bishop, he whom Buonaparte named 
" Primus Aquisgranensis Episcoptis." 

In a dark room in the chapel, my conductor opened 
another armory, which contains th 3 sarcophagus of Char- 
lemagne. It is a magnificent coffin of white marble, upon 
which the carrying off of Proserpine is sculptured. The 
fair girl is represented as making 1 desperate efforts to dis- 
entangle herself from the grasp of Pluto, but the god has 
seized her half-naked neck, anil is forcing her head 
against Minerva. Some of the Nymphs, the attendants 
of Proserpine, are in eager combat with the Furies, while 
others are endeavouring to stop the car, which is drawn 
by two dragons. A goddess has boldly seized one of them 
by the wing, and the animal, to all appearance, is crying 
hideously. This bas-relief is a poem, powerful and start- 
ling like the pictures of Pagan Rome, and like some of 
those of Rubens. 

The tomb, before it became the sarcophagus of Char- 
lemagne, was, it is said, that of Augustus. 

After mounting a narrow staircase, my guide conducted 
me to a gallery which is called the Hochmunster. In this 
place is the arm-chair of Charlemagne. It is low, ex- 
ceedingly wide, with a round back ; is formed of four 
pieces of white marble, without ornaments or sculpture, 



72 ARM-CHAIR OF CHARLEMAGNE. 

and has for a seat an oak board, covered with a cushion 
of red veivet. There are six steps up to it, two of which 
are of granite, the others of marble. On this chair, sat 
a crown upon his head, a globe in one hand, a sceptre in 
the other, a sword by his side, the imperial mantle over 
his shoulders, the cross of Christ round his neck, and his 
feet in the sarcophagus of Augustus, Carolo Magno in 
his tomb, in which attitude he remained for three 
hundred and fifty-two years from 814 to 1166, when 
Frederick Barberousse, coveting the chair for his co- 
ronation, entered the tomb. Barberousse was an illus- 
trious prince and a valiant soldier; and it must, there- 
fore, have been a moment singularly strange when this 
crowned man stood before the crowned corpse of Charle- 
magne the one in all the majesty of empire, the other 
in all the majesty of death. The soldier overcame the 
shades of greatness ; the living became the despoliator of 
inanimate worth. The chapel claimed the skeleton, and 
Barberousse the marble chair, which afterwards became 
the throne where thirty- six emperors were crowned. Fer- 
dinand the First was the last ; Charles the Fifth preceded 
him The coronation of the German emperors now takes 
place at Frankfort. 

I remained spell- bound near this chair, so simple, yet 
so grand. I gazed upon the marble steps, marked by the 
feet of those thirty-six Caesars who had here seen the 
bursting forth of their illustriousness, and who, each in 
his turn, had ceased to be of the living. Thoughts started 
in my mind, recollections flashed across my memory. 
When Frederick Barberousse was old, he determined for 



NAPOLEON AND JOSEPHINE. 73 

the second or third time, to engage in the Holy War. 
One day he reached the banks of the beautiful river 
Cydnus, and, being warm, took a fancy to bathe. The 
man who could profane the tomb of Charlemagne might 
well forget Alexander. He entered the river ; the cold 
seized him. Alexander was young, and survived ; Bar- 
berousse was old, and lost his life. 

It appears to me as probable, that, one day or another, 
a pious thought will strike some saint, king, or emperor, 
that he will take the remains of Charlemagne from the 
armory where the sacristans have placed them gather all 
that still exists of that great skeleton and place them 
once more in the arm-chair, the Carlo vingian diadem 
upon the skull, the globe of the empire on the arm, and 
the imperial mantle over the bones. 

This would be a magnificent sight for him who dared 
to look at the apparition. What thoughts would crowd 
upon his mind when beholding the son of Pepin in his 
tomb he, who equalled in greatness Augustus or Sesos- 
tris : he, who in fiction, is a knight-errant, like Roland, 
a magician; like Merlin ; for religion, a saint, like 
Peter or Jerome ; for philosophy, civilization personifies 
him, and every thousand years assumes a giant form to 
traverse some profound abyss civil wars, barbarism, 
revolutions ; which calls itself at one time Caesar, then 
Charlemagne, and at another Napoleon. 

In 1804, when Buonaparte became known as Napo- 
leon, he visited Aix-la-Chapelle. Josephine, who accom- 
panied him, had the caprice to sit down on this chair ; 
but Napoleon, out of respect for Charlemagne, took off 
his hat, and remained for some time standing, and in si- 



74 SWISS GUIDE. 

lence. The following fact is somewhat remarkable, and 
struck me forcibly: In 814 Charlemagne died; a 
thousand years afterwards, most probably about the same 
hour, Napoleon fell. 

In that fatal year, 1814, the allied sovereigns visited 
the tomb of the great Carolo. Alexander of Russia, like 
Napoleon, took off his hat and uniform ; Frederick Wil- 
liam of Prussia kept on his casquette de petite tenue ; 
Francis retained his surtout and round bonnet. The 
King of Prussia stood upon the marble steps, receiving 
information from the prevot of the chapitre respecting the 
coronation of the emperors of Germany ; the two em- 
perors remained silent. Napoleon, Josephine, Alexander, 
Frederick William, and Francis, are now no more. 

My guide, who gave me these details, was an old 
French soldier, and had been for some time one of the 
appurtenances of Aix-la-Chapelle. Formerly he shoul- 
dered his musket, and marched at the sound of the drum ; 
now, he carries a halberd in the clerical ceremonies before 
the chapitre. This man, who speaks to travellers of 
Charlemagne, has Napoleon nearest his heart. When he 
spoke of the battles in which he had fought, of his old 
comrades, and of his colonel, the tears streamed from his 
eyes. He knew that I was a Frenchman ; and, on my 
leaving, said, with a solemnity which I shall never 
forget 

" You can say, sir, that you saw at Aix-la-Chapelle an 
old soldier of the Thirty-sixth Swiss regiment." 

Then, a moment afterwards, added 

" You can also state that he belongs to three na- 
tions, Prussian by birth ; Swiss by trade ; but his 
whole heart is French." 



SUPPOSED BIRTHPLACE OF CHARLEMAGNE. 75 

On quitting the chapel I was so much absorbed in re- 
flection, that I all but passed a lovely fa9ade of the four- 
teenth century, ornamented with the statues of seven 
emperors. I was awoke from my reverie by the sudden 
bursts of laughter which escaped from two travellers, the 
elder of whom, I was told in the morning by the landlord 
of the Emperor's Hotel, was M. le Comte d'A., of the 
most noble family of Artois. 

" Here are names ! " they cried. "It certainly required 
a revolution to form such names as these. Le Capitaine 
Lasoupe, and Colonel Graindorge.'' 

My poor Swiss had spoken to them, as he did to me, 
about his old captain and colonel, for they were so called. 

A few minutes afterwards I was on my way to the 
H6tel-de-Ville, the supposed birthplace of Charlemagne, 
which, like the chapel, is an edifice made of five or six 
others. In the middle of the court there is a fountain of 
great antiquity, with a bronze statue of Charlemagne. 
To the left and right are two others both surmounted 
with eagles, their heads half turned towards the grave and 
tranquil emperor. 

The evening was approaching. I had passed the whole 
of the day among these grand and austere souvenirs ; and, 
therefore, deemed it essential to take a walk in the open 
fields, to breathe the fresh air, and to watch the rays of 
the declining sun. I wandered along some dilapidated 
walls, entered a field, then some beautiful alleys, in one 
of which I seated myself. Aix-la-Chapelle lay extended 
before me, partly hid by the shades of evening, which 
were falling around. By degrees the fog gained the roofs of 
the houses, and shrouded the town steeples ; then nothing 

H-2 



76 REVERIE. 

was seen but two huge masses, the H6tel-de-Ville and 
the chapel. All the emotions, all the thoughts and visions 
which flitted across my mind during the day, now crowded 
upon me. The first of the two dark objects wag to me 
only the birthplace of a child ; the second was the rest- 
ing-place of greatness. At intervals, in the midst of my 
reverie, I imagined that I saw the shade of this giant, 
whom we call Charlemagne, developing itself between 
this great cradle and still greater tomb. 



LETTER X. 

COLOGNE. THE BANKS OF THE RHINE. ANDERNACH. 

Duez. Cathedral of Cologne. The peasantry. The strolling musician. 
Personifiers of the gods Goulu, Gluton, Goinfre, and Gouliaf. 
Dome of the cathedral of Cologne. Epitaph. Tomb of the Three 
Wise Men of the East. Destiny. The Hdtel-de-Ville. The three 
bas-reliefs. The epic poet of Cologne. Cologne at night. Time and 
its effects. 

jY DEAR FRIEND, I am angry with 
myself. I passed through Cologne 
as a fool would, having remained 
there only forty-eight hours. At 
first I purposed staying a fortnight, 
but the rain, wind, and fog, which were in abundance for 
the last four days, gave way to a sun which, shedding in 
beauty its rays upon the scenery of the Rhine, induced 
me to embrace the opportunity of seeing this classic 
stream in all its riches, in all its loveliness, and with 
all its charms. I left Cologne this morning, leav- 
ing the city of Agrippa behind me, without seeing 
the old pictures of Saint-Marie-au-Capitole, or the 
Crucifixion of St. Peter, painted by Rubens for the 
church in which he was baptized, or the bones of the 

H3 




78 COLOGNE CATHEDRAL. 

ten thousand virgins in the cloisters of the Ursulines, or the 
silver sarcophagus of St. Cunibert, or the tomb of Duns 
Scotus, or the sepulchre of the Empress Theophanie, wife 
of Othon II., in the church of Saint Panteleon. In fact, 
the cathedral and the H6telde-Ville were all that I saw. 

The sun had set when we reached Cologne. I gave 
my luggage to a porter, with orders to carry it to an 
hotel at Duez, which is a little town on the opposite side 
of the Rhine, joined to Cologne by abridge of boats; and 
then directed my steps towards the cathedral. Rather 
than ask my way, I wandered up and down the narrow 
streets, which night had all but obscured. At last I en- 
tered a gateway leading to a court, and came out on an 
open square, dark and deserted. A magnificent spec- 
tacle now presented itself. Before me, in the fantastic 
light of a crepusculaire sky, rose, in the midst of a group 
of low houses, an enormous black mass, studded with 
pinnacles and belfries. A little farther was another, not 
quite so broad as the first, but higher ; a kind of square 
fortress, flanked at its angles with four long detached 
towers, and having on its summit something resembling 
a huge feather. On approaching, I discovered that it was 
the cathedral of Cologne. 

What appeared like a large feather was a crane, to 
which sheets of lead were appended, and which, from its 
workable appearance, indicated to passers-by that this 
unfinished temple may one day be completed ; that the 
trunk of a belfry and church, so widely apart at present, 
may ere long be united ; that the dream of Engelbert de 
Berg, which was realized into an edifice under Conrad 
de Hochsteden, may, in an age or two, be the greatest 



COLOGNE CATHEDRAL. 79 

cathedral in the world. This incomplete Iliad sees 
Homers in futurity. 

The church was shut. I surveyed the steeples, and 
was startled at their dimensions. What I had taken for 
towers are the projections of the buttresses. Though 
only the first story is completed, the building is already 
nearly as high as the towers of Notre Dame at Paris. 
Should the spire, according to the plan, be placed upon 
this monstrous trunk, Strasburg would be, comparatively 
speaking, small by its side. It has always struck me 
that nothing resembles ruins more than an unfinished edi- 
fice. Briers, saxifrages, and pellitories, indeed, all 
weeds that root themselves in the crevices and at the 
base of old buildings, have besieged these venerable 
walls. Man only constructs what Nature in time destroys. 

All was quiet ; there was no one near to break the 
prevailing silence. I approached the fa9ade, as near as 
the gate would permit me, and heard the countless 
shrubs gently rustling in the night breeze. A light which 
appeared at a neighbouring window cast its rays upon a 
group of exquisite statues, angels and saints, reading 
or preaching, with a large open book before them. 
Admirable prologue for a church, which is nothing else 
than the Word made marble, brass, or stone ! Swallows 
have fearlessly taken up their abode here, and their sim- 
ple yet curious masonry contrasts strangely with the 
architecture of the building. 

This was my first visit to the cathedral of Cologne. 

By the bye, I have told you nothing of the road be- 
twixt it and Aix-la-Chapelle. In fact, very little can be 
said ; a green plain, with an occasional oak and a few 



80 THE STROLLING MUSICIAN. 

poplar- trees, alone meet the eye. In the villages, the old 
female peasants, enveloped in long mantles, walk about 
like spectres; while the young, clothed in short jupons, if 
not walking, are seen in a position equally interesting 
on their knees, washing the door-steps. As for the men, 
they are decorated with blue smock-frocks and high- 
crowned hats, as if they were the peasants of a constitu- 
tional country. 

Scarcely a single person was seen on the road ; the 
inclemency of the weather was, perhaps, the cause. A 
poor strolling musician passed, -a stick in one hand, and 
his cornet-a-piston in the other, clothed in a blue coat, a 
fancy waistcoat, and white trousers, the bottoms turned 
up as high as the legs of his boots. The pauvre diable, 
from the knees upwards, was fitted out for a ball ; his 
lower extremities, however, were better suited for the 
road. In a little square village, in front of an auberge, I 
admired four jolly-boking travellers seated before a table 
loaded with flesh, fish, and wines. One was drinking, 
another cutting, a third eating, a fourth devouring, like 
four personifications of Voraciousness and Gourmandism 
It seemed to me as if I beheld the gods Goulu, Glouton, 
Goinfre, and Gouliaf, seated round a mountain of eat- 
ables. 

The following morning I again visited the dome of the 
cathedral of Cologne. I examined the windows of this mag- 
nificent edifice, which are of the time of Maximilian, and 
painted with all the extravagance of the German Renais- 
sance. On one of them is a representation of the genealogy 
of the Holy Virgin. At the bottom of the painting, Adam, 
in the costume of an emperor, is lying upon his back. A 



GENEALOGY OF THE HOLT VIRGIN. 81 

large tree, which fills the whole pane, is growing out of 
his stomach, and on the branches appear all the crowned 
ancestors of Mary David playing the harp, Solomon in 
pensiveness ; and at the top of the tree a flower opens, and 
discloses the Virgin carrying the infant Jesus. 

A few steps farther on I read this epitaph, which 
breathes sorrow and resignation : 

"INCMTVS ANTE FVI COMES EMVNDVS, 

VOCITATVS, HIC NECE PROSTRATVS, SUB 
TBGOR VT VOLVI. FRISHEM, SANCTE, 
MEVM FERO, PETRE, TIBI COMITATVM 
ET MIHI REDDE STATVM, TE PRECOR, 
ETHEREVM H.SC. LAPIDVM MASSA 
COMITIS COMPLECTITVR OSSA." 

I entered the church, and was struck with the choir. 
There are pictures of all epochs and of all forms ; innu- 
merable marble statues of bishops ; chevaliers of the time 
of the crusades, their dogs lying lovingly at their feet ; 
apostles clothed in golden robes ; and tapestries painted 
from the designs of Rubens. Everything, it must be 
said, is shamefully demolished. If some one constructed 
the exterior of the cathedral of Cologne, I do not know 
who has demolished the interior. There is not a tomb 
entire, the figures being either broken off or mutilated. 
The flies revel on the venerable face of the Archbishop 
Philip of Heinsburg, and the man called Conrad of 
Hochsteden, the founder of this church, like Gulliver, in 
the Lilliputian tale, cannot at present crush the spiders 
that knit him to the ground. Alas ! the bronze arm is 
nothing to the arm of flesh. I observed, in an obscure 
corner, the dismantled statue of an old man with a long 
beard ; I believe it is that of Michael Angelo. 
I will now mention the most venerable construction 




82 MA.RT OF MEDIC1S. 

which this church contains that of the famed tomb of 
the Three Wise Men of the East. 

The room is of marble, is rather 
large, and represents the styles 
of architecture of Louis the 
Thirteenth and Louis the Four- 
teenth. On raising our eyes, 
we perceive a has relief repre- 
senting the adoration of the 
three kings, and, underneath, 
the inscription 
" Corpora ranctorum recubant hie 

terna magorum, 

Ex his sublatum nihil est alibi ve lo- 
catum." 

This, then, is the resting-place of the three poetic kings 
of the east. I assure you there is no legend that pleases 
me so much as this of the Mllle et Une Nuits. I ap- 
proached the tomb, and perceived, in the shade, a mas- 
sive reliquaire, sparkling with pearls, diamonds, and other 
precious stones, which seemed to relate the history of 
these three kings, ab oriente venerunt. In front of the 
tomb are three lamps, the one bearing the name of Gas- 
par, the other Melchior, and the third Balthazar It is 
an ingenious idea to have somehow illuminated the 
names of the three wise men in front of the sepulchre. 

On leaving, something pierced the sole of my boot. I 
looked downwards, and found that it was a large nail 
projecting from a square of black marble, upon which I 
was walking. After examining the stone, I remembered 
that Mary of Medicis had desired that her heart should 



DESTTNT. . 83 

be placed under the pavement of the cathedral of Co- 
logne, and before the tomb of the three kings. Formerly 
a bronze or brass plate, with an inscription, covered it ; 
but when the French took Cologne, some revolutionist, 
or perhaps a rapacious brazier, seized it, as had been 
done by many others ; for a host of brass nails, project- 
ing from the marble, bespeak depredations of a similar 
nature. Alas, poor queen ! She first saw herself effaced 
from the heart of Louis the Thirteenth, her son ; then 
from the remembrance of Richelieu, her creature ; and 
now she is effaced from the earth. 

How strange are the freaks of destiny ! Mary de Me- 
dicis, widow of Henry IV., exiled and abandoned, had a 
daughter, Henriette, widow of Charles the First, who 
died at Cologne in 1642, in the house where, sixty-five 
years before, Rubens, her painter, was born. 

The dome of Cologne, when seen by day, appeared to 
me to have lost a little of its sublimity ; it no longer had 
what I call la grandeur crepusculaire that the evening 
lends to huge objects ; and I must say that the cathedral 
of Beauvais, which is scarcely known, and also un- 
finished, is not inferior, either in size or in detail, to the 
cathedral of Cologne. 

The H6tel-de- Ville, situated near the cathedral, is one 
of those singular edifices which have been built at differ- 
ent times, and which consist of all the styles of architec- 
ture seen in ancient buildings. The mode in which those 
edifices have been built forms rather an interesting study. 
Nothing is regular, no fixed plan has been drawn out, 
all has been built as necessity required. 

Thus the H6tel-de- Ville, which has, probably, some 



84 HOTEL-DE VILLS. 

Roman cave near its foundation, was, in 1250, only a 
structure similar to those of our edifices built with pillars. 
For the convenience of the night-watchman, and in order 
to sound the alarum, a steeple was required, and in the 
fourteenth century a tower was built. Under Maximilian 
a taste for elegant structures was everywhere spread, and 
the bishops of Cologne, deeming it essential to dress their 
city-house in new raiments, engaged an Italian architect, 
a pupil, most probably, of old Michael Angelo, and a 
French sculptor, a friend of young Jean Gujon, who ad- 
justed upon the blackened faqade of the thirteenth cen- 
tury a triumphant and magnificent porch. A few years 
expired, and they stood sadly in want of a promenoir by 
the side of the Registry. A back court was built, and 
galleries erected, which were sumptuously enlivened by 
heraldry and bas-reliefs. These I had the pleasure of 
seeing ; hut, in a few years, no person will have the same 
gratification, for, without anything being done to prevent 
it, they are fast falling into ruins. At last, under Charles 
the Fifth, a large room for sales and for the assemblies of 
the citizens was required, and a tasteful building of stone 
and brick was added. Thus a corps of the thirteenth cen- 
tury, a belfry of the fourteenth, a porch and backcourt 
of the time of Maximilian, and a hall of that of Charles 
the Fifth, linked together in an original and pleasing 
manner, form the Hotel- de-Ville of Cologne. 

I went up to the belfry ; and under a gloomy sky, which 
harmonised with the edifice and with my thoughts, I saw 
at my feet the whole of this admirable town. 

Cologne upon the Rhine, like Rouen upon the Seine, 
A.nvers upon the Escaut, in fact, like all towns through 



COLOGNE. 85 

which a large current of water flows, has the appear- 
ance of an arch, the river forming the line. 

From Thurmchen to Bayenthurme, the town, which 
extends upwards of a league on the banks of the river, 
displays a whole host of windows and fa9ades. In the 
midst of roofs, turrets, and gables, the summits of twenty- 
four churches strike the eye, all of different styles, and 
each church, from its grandeur, worthy of the name of 
cathedral. If we examine the town en detail, all is stir, 
all is life. The bridge is crowded with passengers and 
carriages ; the river is covered with sails. Here and 
there clumps of trees caress, as it were, the houses black- 
ened by time ; and the old stone hotels of the fifteenth 
century, with their long frieze of sculptured flowers, fruit, 
and leaves, upon which the dove, when tired, rests itself, 
relieve the monotony of the slate roofs and brick fronts 
which surround them. 

Round this great town mercantile from its industry, 
military from its position, marine from its river is a vast 
plain that borders Germany, which the Rhine crosses at 
different places, and is crowned on the north-east by his- 
toric croupes that wonderful nest of legends and tradi- 
tions, called the " Seven Mountains." Thus Holland and 
its commerce, Germany and its poetry like the two great 
aspects of the human mind, the positive and the ideal 
shed their beams upon the horizon of Cologne ; a city, 
of business and of meditation. 

After descending from the belfry I stopped in the yard 
before a handsome porch of the Renaissanc3, the second 
story of which is formed of a series of small triumphal 
arches, with inscriptions. The first is dedicated to Caesar; 



86 TOWN HOUSE. 

the second to Augustus ; the third to Agrippa, the founder 
of Cologne ; the fourth to Constantine, the Christian em- 
peror ; the fifth to Justine, the great legislator ; and the 
sixth to Maximilian. Upon the fa9ade, the poetic sculp- 
tor has chased three bos reliefs, representing the three 
lion-combatants, Milo of Crotona, Pepin-le-Bref, and 
Daniel. At the two extremities he has placed Milon de 
Crotone, attacking the lion by strength of body ; and 
Daniel, subduing the lions by the-power of mind. Be- 
tween these is Pepin-le-Bref, conquering his ferocious 
antagonist with that mixture of moral and physical strength 
which distinguishes the soldier. Between pure strength 
and pure thought is courage ; between the athletic and 
the prophet the hero. 

Pepin, sword in hand, has plunged his left arm, which 
is enveloped in his mantle, into the mouth of the lion : 
the animal stands, with extended claws, in that attitude 
which in heraldry represents the lion rampant ; Pepin at- 
tacks it bravely, and vanquishes. Daniel is standing mo- 
tionless, his arms by his side, and his eyes lifted up to hea- 
ven, the lions lovingly rolling at his feet. As for Milo de 
Crotona, he defends himself against the lion, which is in 
the- act of devouring him. His blind presumption, has 
put too much faith in muscle, in corporeal strength. 
These three bos reliefs contain a world of meaning ; the 
last produces a powerful effect. It is Nature avenging 
herself on the man whose only faith is in brute force. 

As I was about to leave the town-house, this spacious 
building this dwelling, rich in legendary lore as well as 
in historical facts, a man, in appearance older than he 
actually was, crooked from disposition more than from the 



EPIC POBT OF COLOGNE. 87 

influence of age, crossed the yard. The person who con- 
ducted me to the belfry, in pointing him out, said 

" That man is a poet : he has composed several epics 
against Napoleon, against the Revolution of 1830, and 
against the French. The last, his chef d'ceuvre, beseeches 
an architect to finish the church of Cologne in the same 
style as the Pantheon in Paris." 

Epics ! granted ! Nevertheless, this man, or poet, is 
the most unwashed-looking animal that ever I put eyes 
upon. I do not think we have anything in France that 
will bear a comparison with the epic poet of Cologne. 

To make up for the opinion which this strange-looking 
animal had formed of us, a little old man, with a quick 
eye, came out of a barber's shop, in one I do not know 
which of the dark and obscure streets, and, guessing my 
country, from my appearance, came to me, shouting out 

"Monsieur, Monsieur ,fous, Franqais ! oh, lesFranqais! 
ran ! plan ! plan ! plan ! ran, tan, plan ! la querre a toute 
le monde ! Prafes ! Prafes ! Napoleon, n^est-ce pas ? La 
querre a toute I' Europe ! Oh, les Franqais, pien Prafes, 
Monsieur. La paionette au qui a tous ces Priciens, eine 
ponnea quilpite gomme a lend. Prafo les Francais / ran ! 
plan ! plan ! " 

I must admit that this harangue pleased me. France 
is great in the recollection and in the hopes of these 
people. All on the banks of the Rhine love us I had 
almost said wait for us. 

In the evening, as the stars were shining, I took a walk 
upon the side of the river opposite to Cologne. Before 
me was the whole town, with its innumerable steeples 



i2 



88 UTILITARIANISM. 

figuring in detail upon the pale western sky. To my left 
rose, like the giant of Cologne, the high spire of St. 
Martin's, with its two towers ; and, almost in front, the 
sombre abside- cathedral, with its many sharp-pointed 
spires, resembling a monstrous hedgehog ; the crane pre- 
viously mentioned forming the tail, and near the base tw r o 
lights, which appeared like eyes sparkling with fire. No- 
thing disturbed the stillness of the night but the rustling 
of the waters at my feet, the heavy tramp of a horse's 
hoofs upon the bridge, and the sound of a blacksmith's 
hammer. A long stream of fire that issued from the forge 
caused the adjoining windows to sparkle ; then, as if 
hastening to its opposite element, disappeared in the 
water. 

From this grand and sombre ensemble, my thoughts 
took a melancholy turn, and, in a kind of reverie, I said 
to myself, " The germaine city has disappeared, the city 
of Agrippa is no longer, but the town of St. Engelbert 
still stands. How long will it be so ? Decay, more than 
a thousand years since, seized upon the temple built by 
Saint Helena ; the church constructed by the Archbishop 
Anno will fall. This town is demolished by its river. 
Scarcely a day passes but some old stone, some ancient 
relic, is detached by the commotion of the steam-boats. 
A town is not situated with impunity upon the great 
artery of Europe. Cologne, though not so old as Treves 
or Soleure, has already been thrice deformed and trans- 
formed, by the rapid and violent change of ideas to which 
it has been subjected. All is changing. The spirit of 
positivism and utilitarianism for which the grovellers of 



UTILITARIANISM. 89 

the present day are such strong advocates penetrates 
and destroys. Architecture, old and reverential, gives 
way to modern "good taste" Alas! old cities are fast 
disappearing. 



LETTER XI. 

APROPOS OP THE HOUSE *' IBACH." 

Man's insignificancy. His want of knowledge of himself his love for 
those who injure him. The House Ibach. Marie deMedicis, Riche- 
lieu, and Louis the Thirteenth. 

O my friend ! my dear friend ! what 
Nature does, perhaps Nature knows ; 
but one thing is certain, and I am not 
the only one who says so, that men 
know not what they do. Often in 
confronting history with the material 
world, in the midst of those comparisons which my mind 
draws between the events hidden by God and which time 
and creation partly disclose, I have secretly shuddered, 
when thinking that the forests, the lakes, the mountains, 
the sky, the stars, and the ocean, are things clear and 
terrible, abounding in lighl; and full of science, and look, 
as it were, in disdain upon man that haughty, presump- 
tuous thing, whose arm is linked to impotence that 
piece of vanity, blind in his own ignorance. It seems to 
me as if the tree was conscious of its fruit ; yet man 
knows nothing of his destiny. 




MAN AND HIS UNDERSTANDING. 91 

The life of man and his understanding are at the mercy 
of a divine power, called by some, Providence, by others, 
Chance, which blends, combines, and decomposes all; 
which conceals its workings in the clouds, and discloses 
the results in open day. We think we do one thing, 
whilst we do another, urceus exit. History affords copious 
proofs of this. When the husband of Catherine de Me- 
dicis, and the lover of Diane de Poitiers, allowed himself to 
be allured by Philippe Due, the handsome Piemontaise, it 
was not only Diane d'Angouleme that he engendered, 
but it brought about the reconciliation of his son Henry 
the Third with his cousin Henry the Fourth. When 
Charles the Second of England hid himself, after the 
battle of Worcester, in the trunk of an oak, he only 
thought of concealment something m 3re was the result ; 
he named a constellation " The Royal Oak," and gave 
Halley the opportunity of detracting from the fame of 
Tycho. Strange that the second husband of Madame de 
Maintenon in revoking the Edict of Nantes, and the par. 
liament of 1688 in expelling James the Second, should 
bring about the singular battle of Almanza, where, face 
to face, were the French army, commanded by an English- 
man, Marshal Berwick, and the English army, com- 
manded by a Frenchman, Ruvigny, Lord Galloway. If 
Louis the Thirteenth had not died on the 14th of May, 
1643, it would never have struck the old Count de Fon- 
tana to attack Kocroy, which gave an heroic prince of 
twenty-two the glorious opportunity of making the Duke 
d'Enghien the great Cond6. 

In the midst of all these strange and striking facts 
which load our chronologies, what singular and unfore- 



92 LAUBESPINE 1>E CHATEAUNEUF. 

seen occurrences ! what formidable counter-blows ! In 
1664, Louis the Fourteenth, after the offence done to his 
ambassador, Crequi, caused the Corsicans to be banished 
from Rome ; a hundred and forty years afterwards Buo- 
naparte exiled the Bourbons from France ! 

What shadows ! but still what light appears in the 
midst of the darkness! About 1612, when Henry of 
Montmorency, then about seventeen years of age, saw 
among the servants of his father a pale and mean looking 
menial, Laubespine de Chateauneuf, bowing and scrap- 
ing before him, who could have whispered in his ears 
that this page would become under-deacon, that this 
under-deacon would become the lord keeper of the great 
seal, that this keeper of the great seal would preside at 
the parliament of Toulouse, and that, at the expiration of 
twenty years, this " deacon -president " would surlily de- 
mand from the Pope permission to have his master, 
Henry the Second, Duke of Montmorency, Marshal of 
France, and peer of the kingdom, decapitated ? When the 
president of Thou so carefully added his clauses to the 
ninth edict of Louis the Eleventh, who could have told 
the monarch that this very edict, with Laubardemont for 
a handle, would be the hatchet with which Richelieu 
would strike off the head of his son ? 

In the midst of all this chaos there are laws ; confu- 
sion is only on the surface, order is at the bottom. After 
long intervals frightful facts similar to those which as- 
tounded our fathers, come like comets, in all their terror, 
upon ourselves ; always the same ambushes the same mis- 
fortunes ; always foundering upon the same coasts. The 
name alone changes the deeds still continue. A few 



THE HOUSE " IBACH." 93 

days before the fatal treaty of 1814, the emperor might 
have said to his thirteen marshals- 

" Amen dico vobis quia unns vestrum me traditurus est." 
A Caesar always cherishes a Brutus ; a Charles the 
First prevents a Cromwell from going to Jamaica ; a Louis 
the Sixteenth throws obstacles in the way of a Mirabeau, 
who is desirous of setting out for the Indies ; queens 
whose deeds are characterized by cruelty are punished 
by ungrateful sons ; all Agrippas beget Neros, who de- 
stroy those who gave them birth ; a Mary of Medicis 
always engenders a Louis the Thirteenth, who banishes 
her. 

You, without doubt, remark the strange turn my 
thoughts have taken from one idea to another to these 
two Italians to these two women, Agrippina and Mary 
de Medicis, who are the spectres of Cologne. About 
sixteen hundred years ago, the daughter of Germanicus, 
mother of Nero, connected her name and memory with 
Cologne, as did, at a later date, the wife of Henry the 
Fourth and mother of Louis the Thirteenth. The first, 
who was born there, died by the poniard ; the second 
expired at Cologne, from the effects of poison. 

I visited, at Cologne, the house in which Mary of 
France breathed her last the house Ibach according to 
some, and Jabach according to others; but, instead of re- 
lating what I saw, I will tell you the thoughts that flashed 
across my mind when there. Excuse me for not giving 
you all the local details, of which I am so fond ; in fact, my 
friend, I am afraid that I have, ere this, fatigued you with 
my festons and my astragales. The unhappy queen died 
here, at the age of sixty-eight, on the 3rd of July, 1642. 



94 LOUIS THE FOURTI.ENTH. 

She was exiled for eight years from France, had wandered 
everywhere, and was very expensive to the countries in 
which she stopped. When at London, Charles the First 
treated her with munificence, allowing. her, the three years 
she resided there, a hundred pounds sterling per day. 
Afterwards I must say it with regret Paris returned 
that hospitality to Henrietta, daughter of Henry the 
Fourth and widow of Charles the First, by giving her a 
garret in the Louvre, where she often remained in bed for 
want of the comforts of a fire, anxiously expecting a few 
louis that the coadjuteur had promised to lend her. Her 
mother, the widow of Henry the Fourth, experienced the 
same misery at Cologne. 

How strange and striking are these details ! Marie de 
Medicis was not long dead when Richelieu ceased to 
live, and Louis the Thirteenth expired the following year. 
For what good was the inveterate hatred that existed be- 
tween these three mortal beings ? for what end so much 
intrigue, quarrelling, and persecution? God alone knows. 
All three died almost at the same hour. 

There is still something remaining of a mysterious na- 
ture about Mary de Medicis. I have always been hor- 
rified at the terrible sentence that the President Henault, 
probably without intention, wrote upon this queen : 

" Elle nefutpas assez surprise de la mort de Henri IF.' 9 

I must admit that all this tends to shed a lustre upon 
that admirable epoch, the glorious reign of Louis the 
Fourteenth. The darkness hat obscured the beginning of 
that century contrasted admirably with the brilliancy of 
its close. Louis the Fourteenth was not only, as Richelieu, 
powerful, but he was majestic ; not only, as Cromwell, 



LOUIS THE FOURTEENTH. 95 

great, but in him was serenity. Louis the Fourteenth 
was not, perhaps, the genius in the master, but genius 
surrounded him. This may lessen a king in the eyes of 
some, but it adds to the glory of his reign. As for me, 
as you already know, I love that which is absolute, which 
is perfect; and therefore have always had a profound re- 
spect for this grave and worthy prince, so well-born, so 
much loved, and so well surrounded ; a king in his cradle, 
a king in the tomb ; true sovereign in every acceptation 
of the word ; central monarch of civilization ; pivot of 
Europe ; seeing, so to speak, from tour to tour, eight popes, 
five sultans, three emperors, two kings of Spain, three 
kings of Portugal, four kings and one queen of England, 
three kings of Denmark, one queen and two kings of 
Swed3n, four kings of Poland, and four czars of Muscovy, 
appear, shine forth, and disappear around his throne ; 
polar star of an entire age, who, during seventy- two 
years, saw all the constellations majestically perform 
their evolutions round him. 



LETTER XII. 




A FEW WORDS RESPECTING THE WALDRAP MUSEUM. 

Schleis Rotten." Stretching-out-of-the-hand system," or, travelling 
contingencies .Recapitulation . 

ESIDES the cathedral, the Hotel-de- 
Ville, and the Ibach House, I visited 
Schleis Kotten, the vestiges of the 
subterranean aqueduct which, at the 
time of the Romans, led from Co- 
logne to Travers. Traces of it are at 
the present day to be seen in thirty-two villages. In Co- 
logne I inspected the Waldraf Museum, and am almost 
tempted to give you an inventory of all I saw, but I will 
spare you. Suffice it to know, that, if I did not find the 
war-chariot of the ancient Germans, the famed Egyptian 
mummy, or the grand culverin founded at Cologne in 
1400, I saw a very fine sarcophagus, and the armory of 
Bernard Bishop of Galen. I was also shown an enor- 
mous cuirass, which was said to have been the property 
of Jean de Wert, a general of the empire ; but I sought 
in vain for his sword, which measured eight feet and a 



THE TRAVELLER'S PURSF. 97 

half in length ; his immense pike, likened to the pine of 
Polyphemus ; and his large helmet, that, as it is said, 
took two men to raise it. 

The pleasure of seeing all these curiosities museums, 
churches, town-houses, &c. is alloyed by the everlast- 
ingly extended hand pay, pay. Upon the bofders of 
the Rhine, as at other places much frequented, the 
stranger is obliged to have his hand in constant commu- 
nication with his pocket. The purse of the traveller 
that precious article is to him everything, since hospi- 
tality is no longer seen receiving the weary voyager with 
soft words and cordial looks. I will give you an idea of 
the extent to which the stretching-out-of-the-hand sys- 
tem is carried on among the intelligents naturels of this 
country. Remember, there is no exaggeration only the 
truth. 

On entering a town, an understrapper ascertains the 
hotel that you intend putting up at, asks for your pass- 
port, takes it, and puts it into his pocket. The horses 
stop; you look round, and find that you are in a court- 
yard that your present journey is terminated. The driver, 
who has not exchanged a word with any one during the 
journey, alights, opens the door, and extends his hand 
with an air of modesty " Remember the driver." A 
minute elapses : the postilion presents himself, and makes 
an harangue, which signifies, " Don't forget me." The lug- 
gage is uncorded ; a tall, fleshless animal sets your port- 
manteau gently upon the ground, with your nightcap on 
the top of it; so much trouble "must be rewarded." 
Another creature, more curious perhaps than the latter, 
puts your chattels upon a wheelbarrow, asks the name 

K 



98 THE TRAVELLER'S PURSE. 

of the hotel you have fixed upon, then runs before you, 
pushing his shapeless machine. No sooner arrived at the 
hotel than the host approaches, and begins a dialogue, 
which ought to be written in all languages upon the 
doors of the respective auberges. 

" Good day, sir.'* 

"If you have a spare room, I should like to engage it." 

" Very well, sir. Thomas, conduct the gentleman to 
No. 4." 

" I should like something to eat." 

" Immediately, sir, immediately." 

You go to No. 4, where you find your luggage has ar- 
rived. A man appears; it is the person who conveyed 
the luggage to the hotel. " The porter, Sir." A second 
makes his appearance ; what the devil does he want ? It 
is the person who carried your luggage into the room. 
You say to him 

"Very well; I shall pay you, on leaving, with the 
other servants." 

" Monsieur," the man replies, with a supplicating air, 
" I don't belong to the hotel." 

There is no alternative "disburse." You take a 
walk ; a handsome church presents itself. You cannot 
think of passing it : no, no, you must go in, for it is not 
every day you meet such a structure. You walk round, 
gazing at everything ; at last a door meets your view. 
Jesus says, " Compelle intrare ; " the priests ought to 
keep the doors open, but the beadles shut them, in order 
to gain a few sous. An old woman, who has perceived your 
embarrassment, comes and shows you a bell by the side 
of a small wicket ; you ring, the wicket is opened, and 
tit beadle stands before you. 



THE TRAVELLER'S PURSE. 99 

" Can I see the interior of the church ? " 

" Certainly,'' the old man replies, a sort of grim smile 
lighting up his grave countenance. 

He draws out a bunch of keys, and directs his steps 
towards the principal entrance. Just as you are about to 
go in, something seizes you by the skirt of your coat ; 
you turn round ; it is the obliging old woman, whom you 
have forgotten, ungrateful wretch ! to reward "pay!" 
You at last find yourself in the interior of the church ; 
you contemplate, admire, and are struck with wonder. 

" Why is that picture covered with a green cloth ? " 

" Because," the beadle replies, "it is the most beau- 
tiful painting in the church." 

'* What ! " you say, in astonishment, " the best pic- 
ture hidden ! elsewhere it is exposed to view. Who is it 
by?" 

"Rubens." 

" I should like to see it." 

The beadle leaves you, and in a few minutes returns 
with an old pensive looking individual by his side: it 
is the churchwarden. This worthy personage presses 
a spring, the curtain draws, and you behold the picture. 
The painting seen, the curtain closes, and the church- 
warden bows significantly " Pay, pay." On continuing 
your walk in the church, preceded by the beadle, you 
arrive at the door of the choir, before which a man has 
taken up his stand in "patient expectation." It is a 
Swiss who has the charge of the choir. You walk round 
it, and, on leaving, your attentive cicerone graciously sa- 
lutes you " Only a trifle." You find yourself again 
with the beadle, and soon after pass before the sacristy. 

K2 



100 THE TRAVELLER'S PURSE. 

O, wonder of wonders ! The door is open. You enter, 
and find a sexton. The beadle retires, for the other must 
be left alone with his prey. The sexton smiles, shows 
you the urns, the ecclesiastical ornaments and decorated 
windows, bishops* mitres, and, in a box, a skeleton of 
some saint dressed as a troubadour. You have seen the 
sacristy, therefore "must pay." The beadle again ap- 
pears, and leads you to the ladder that conducts to the 
tower. A view from the steeple must be truly delight- 
ful. You decide on going up. The beadle pushes a door 
open ; you climb up about thirty steps, then you find that 
a door which is locked prevents your proceeding farther. 
You look back, and are surprised that the beadle is no 
longer with you that you are alone. What's to be done? 
You knock ; a face appears ; it is that of the bellman. 
He opens the door, for which kind action " Pay." You 
proceed on your way are delighted to find yourself 
alone that the bellman has not followed. You then be- 
gin to enjoy the pleasure of solitude, and arrive with a 
light heart at the high platform of the tower. You look 
about, come and go, admire the blue sky, the smiling 
country, and the immense horizon. Suddenly you per- 
ceive an unknown animal walking by your side: then 
your ears are dinned with things that you know, and, per- 
haps, care little about. It turns out to be the explica- 
teur, who fills the high office of explaining to the 
stranger the magnificence of the steeple, the church, and 
the surrounding country. This man is ordinarily a stut- 
terer, sometimes deaf ; you do not listen to him ; you 
forget him, in contemplating the churches, the streets, 
the trees, the rivers, and the hills. When you have seen 



RECAPITULATION. 101 

all, you think of descending, and direct your steps to the 
top of the ladder. The bellman is there before you 
" Pay/' 

" Very well," you say, fingering your purse, which is 

momentarily dissolving ; " how much must I give you ?'' 

" I am charged two francs for each person, which go 

to the church revenue ; but, sir, you must give me a trifle 

for my trouble." 

You descend ; the beadle makes his appearance, and 
conducts you with respect to the door of the church. So 
much trouble cannot fail to be well rewarded. 

You return to your hotel, and have scarcely entered 
when you see a person approaching you with a familiar 
air, and who is totally a stranger to you. It is the un- 
derstrapper who took your passport, and who now returns 
'with it to be paid. You dine, the hour of your depar- 
ture comes, and a servant brings you in the bill Fay ; 
also a consideration for the trouble of taking the money. 
An hostler carries your portmanteau to the diligence 
you must remember him. You get into the vehicle ; you set 
off; night falls : you begin the same course to-morrow. 

Let us recapitulate. Something to the driver, a trifle to 
the postilion, the porter, the man who does not belong to 
the hotel, to the old woman, to Rubens, to the Swiss, to 
the sexton, to the bellman, to the church revenue, to the 
beadle, to the passport-keeper, to the servants, and to the 
hostler. How many pays do you call that in a day ? Re- 
member, every one must be silver ; copper is looked upon 
here with the greatest contempt, even by a bricklayer's 
clerk. 

To this ingenious people the traveller is a sack of 

K3 



102 A SIM1L.IE. 

crowns, which the good inhabitants, in order to reduce 
the bulk as soon as possible, are ever shaking. The go- 
vernment itself occasionally claims a share of the spoil ; it 
takes your trunk and portmanteau, places them upon its 
shoulders, and offers you its hand In large towns the 
porters pay to the royal treasure twelve sous two Hards 
for each traveller. I was not a quarter of an hour at Aix- 
la-Chapelle before I had given my mite to the King of 
Prussia. 



LETTER XIII. 

ANDEBNACH. 

A view from Andernach. Village of Luttersdorf. Cathedral. It* 
relics. Andernach castle. Inscription. The Tomb of Hoche. 
Gothic church and inscription. 

STILL write to you from ANDEBNACH, 
where I have been stopping for the last 
three days: it is an ancient municipal 
town, situated upon the banks of the 
Rhine. The coup -d' ceil from my window 
is truly charming. Before me, at the 
foot of a high hill, which obscures from my view part of 
the blue sky, is a handsome tower of the thirteenth cen- 
tury ; to my right the Rhine, and the charming little 
white village of Leutersdorf, half hidden among the 
trees ; and to my left the four steeples of a magnificent 
church. Under my window children are playing, the 
noise of their prattlings mingling with the quacking of 
geese and the chuckling of hen*. 





104 ANDERNACH CHURCH. 

I visited the church on the 
day of my arrival, the inte- 
rior of which is, notwith- 
standing the hideous man- 
ner that some one has plas- 
tered it, rather handsome. 
The Emperor Valentinian, 
and a child of Frederick 
Barberousse, were interred 
in this church, but neither 
inscriptions nor tombstones 
indicate the place where 
they were buried. Our Saviour at the tomb ; a few 
statues, life size, of the fifteenth century, and a chevalier 
of the sixteenth, leaning against a wall ; several figures ; 
the fragments of a mausoleum of the Renaissance, were 
all that the smiling humpbacked belhinger could show 
me for a little piece of silvered copper which passes here 
for thirty sous. 

I must tell you a little adventure which I had an in- 
cident that has left on my mind the impression of a som- 
bre dream. 

On leaving the church I walked round the city. The 
sun was setting behind the high hills that, in seeming 
pride and pristine glory, look down upon the Rhine, on 
the imperial tomb of Valentinian, on the abbey of Saint 
Thomas, and which now see falling, stone by stone, the 
old walls of the feudal town of the Electors of Treves. 

I pursued my way by the side of the moat that skirts 
the dilapidated walls, the fallen stones of which serve as 
seats and tables for half-naked urchins to play upon, and 



TOMB OF HOCHE. 105 

in the evening for young men to tell their fair bergeres 
the achings of their wedded hearts. The formidable 
castle, that was once the defence of Andernach, is now 
an immense ruin ; and the court, once the seat of war, 
is now covered with grass, upon which women bleach 
in summer the cloth that they have woven in winter. 

After leaving the outer gate of Andernach, I found my- 
self upon the banks of the Rhine. The night was calm 
and serene, and nature had lulled itself to sleep. Shep- 
herdesses came to drink from the clear stream, then in 
mirth ran away to hide themselves among the osieries. 
Before me a white village was all but lost in the distance, 
and towards the east, at the extreme border of the hori- 
zon, the full moon, red and round like the eye of a 
Cyclop, appeared between two clouds. 

How often have I walked thus, unconscious of all save 
the beauties which nature presented, alive only to that 
dame who has so great a sway over the sensitive mind ! 
I knew not where I was, nor where I was straying ; and 
when I awoke from my reverie I found myself at the foot 
of a rising ground, crowned at the summit by some stone- 
work. I approached, and was somewhat startled on 
finding a tomb. Whose was it ? J walked round trying 
to discover the name of the person whom it memorialized, 
and at last perceived the following inscription in brass 
letters : 
" L'Armee de Sambre et Meuse a son General en chef.'* 

Above these two lines I saw, by means of the moon, 
which was shining brightly, the name HOCHE. The 
letters had been taken away, but had left their imprint 
upon the granite. 



106 TOMB OP HOCUE. 

That name, in this place, at such an hour, and seen by 
such a light, had a strange, an inexpressible effect upon 
rne. Hoche was always a favourite of mine : he, like 
Marceau, was one of those young men who preluded 
Buonaparte in an attempt which was all but successful. 
This, then, I thought, is the resting-place of Hoche, and 
the well- remembered date of the 18th of April, 1797, 
flashed across my memory. 

I looked around me, endeavouring, but in vain, to iden- 
tify the spot. To the north was a vast plain ; to the south, 
about the distance of a gun-shot, the Rhine ; and at my 
feet, at the base of this tomb, was a small village. 

At that moment a man passed a few steps from the 
monument. I asked him the name of the village, and he 
answered, while disappearing behind a hedge, " Weiss 
Thurm." 

These two words signify White Tower. I then re- 
membered Turris Alba of the Romans, and was proud 
to find that Hoche had died in an illustrious place. It 
was here that Csesar, two thousand years ago, first crossed 
the Rhine. 

It is impossible for me to tell you my inward feelings 
while contemplating the tomb of this great man. Com- 
passion seized my heart. Can such be the resting-place 
of this illustrious warrior, seemingly forgotten by his 
countrymen, unheeded by the stranger? This tomb, 
built by his army, is at the mercy of the passer-by. The 
French general sleeps in a bean-field far from his 
country, and Prussian bricklayers make whatever use it 
pleases them of his tomb ! 

It seemed to me as if I heard a voice coming from the 



CURIOUS BAS-RELIEF. 107 

heap of stones, saying, " France must again possess the 
Rhine!" 

ANDERNACH is a lovely place, with which I was truly 
delighted. From the top of the hills the eye embraces 
an immense circle, extending from Siebengeburge to the 
crests of Ehrenbreitstein. Here there is not a stone 
of an edifice that has not its souvenir, not a single view 
in the country that has not its beauty and its graces ; 
and, what is more, the countenances of the inhabitants 
have that frank and open expression which fails not to 
create delight in the heart of the traveller. Andernach 
is a charming town, notwithstanding Andernach is a 
deserted place. Nobody goes where history, nature, and 
poetry abound ; Coblentz, Bade, and Mannheim are now 
the exclusive resorts of sophisticated tourists. 

I went a second time to the church. The Byzantine 
decoration of the steeples is rich, and of a taste at once 
rude and exquisite. The chapitres of the southern portal 
are very curious ; there is a representation of the Cru- 
cifixion still perfectly visible upon the pediment, and on 
the fa9ade a bas-relief, representing Jesus on his knees, 
with his arms wildly extended : on all sides of him lie 
scattered about, as if in a frightful dream, the mantle of 
derision, the sceptre of reeds, the crown of thorns, the 
rod, the pincers, the hammer, the nails, the ladder, the 
spear, the sponge filled with gall, the sinister profile of 
the hardened thief, the livid countenance of Judas ; and 
before the eyes of the divine Master is the cross, and at 
a little distance the cock crowing, reminding him of the 
ingratitude and abandonment of his friend. This last 
idea is sublime : there is depicted that moral sufferance 
which is more acute than the physical. 



108 SINGULAR INSCRIPTION. 

The gigantic shadows of the two steeples darken this 
sad elegy. Bound the bas-relief the sculptor has en- 
graved the following expressive words : 

" O vos omnes qui transitis per viam, attendite et videte 
si est dolor similis sicut dolor meus. 1538." 

There is another handsome church at Andernach, of 
Gothic structure, which is now transformed into an im- 
mense stable for Prussian cavalry. By the half-open 
door we perceive a long row of horses, which are lost 
in the shadows of the chapel. Above the door are the 
words " Sancta Maria ora pro nobis ;" which is not ex- 
actly an apropos inscription to the abode of horses. 



LETTER XIV. 

THE RHINE. 

The Rhine at evening. Contrast of the Rhine with other rivers. The 
first people who took possession of the banks of the Rhine. Titus 
and the Twenty-second Legion. Singular coincidence. Thedifferent 
phases of the Rhingau. Mysterious populations of the Rhine. Civi- 
lization. Pepin-le-Bref, Charlemagne, and Napoleon. 

OU know, for I have often told you, 
that I love rivers ; they do more than 
bear merchandize ideas float along 
their surface. Rivers, like clarions, 
jH sing to the ocean of the beauty of the 
land, the fertility of the plains, the splendour of cities, 
and of the glory man. 

I have also told you, that of all rivers I prefer the 
Rhine. It is now a year, when passing the bridge of 
boats at Kehl, since I first saw it. I remember that I 
felt a certain respect, a sort of adoration, for this old 
this classic stream. I never think of rivers those great 
works of nature, which are also great things in history, 
without emotion. 

You remember, my' friend, the Rhone at Valserine : 

L 




110 THE RHINE. 

we saw it together, in 1825, in our pleasant excursion to 
Switzerland, which is one of the sweet recollections of 
the happy moments of my life. We were then only 
t \venty years of age. Do you remember with what 
noise, with what ferocious bellowing, the Rhone preci- 
pitated itself into the gulf, whilst the frail bridge upon 
which we were standing was shaking beneath our feet ? 
Ah ! well ! since that time, the Rhone brings to my mind 
the idea of a tiger, the Rhine that of a lion. 

The evening on which I saw the Rhine for the first 
time I was impressed with the same idea. For several 
minutes I stood contemplating this proud and noble 
river violent, but not furious ; wild, but still majestic. 
It was swollen, and was magnificent in appearance, when 
I crossed it, and was washing with its yellow mane, or, 
as Boileau says, its " slimy beard," the bridge of boats. 
Its two banks were lost in the twilight, and, though its 
roaring was loud, still there was tranquillity. 

Yes, my friend, the Rhine is a noble river feudal, re- 
publican, imperial worthy, at the same time, of France 
and of Germany. The whole history of Europe is com- 
bined within its two great aspects in this flood of the 
warrior and of the thinker in this proud stream, which 
causes France to bound, and by whose profound mur- 
murings Germany is bewildered in dreams. 

The Rhine is unique; it combines the qualities of 
every river. Like the Rhone, it is rapid ; broad, like the 
Loire ; encased, like the Meuse ; serpentine, like the 
Seine ; limpid and green, like the Somme ; historical, 
like the Tiber ; royal, like the Danube ; mysterious, like 
the Nile ; spangled with gold, like an American river ; 



THE RHINE. 1 1 I 

and, like a river of Asia, abounding with phantoms and 
fables. 

Before the commencement of history, perhaps before 
the existence of man, where the Rhine now is there was 
a double chain of volcanoes, which on their extinction 
left heaps of lava and basalt lying parallel, "like two long 
walls. At the same epoch the gigantic crystallizations 
formed the primitive mountains; the enormous allu- 
vions of which the secondary mountains consist were 
dried up ; the frightful heap which is now called the 
Alps grew gradually cold, and snow accumulated on them, 
from which two great streams issued, the one, flowing 
towards the north, crossed the plains, encountered the 
sides of the extinguished volcanoes, and emptied itself 
into the ocean ; the other, taking its course westward, fell 
from mountain to mountain, flowed along the side of 
that block of extinguished volcanoes which is now called 
Ardeche, and was finally lost in the Mediterranean. 
The first of those inundations is the Rhine, and the 
second the Rhone. 

From historical records we find that the first people 
who took possession of the banks of the Rhine were the 
half-savaga Celts, who were afterwards named Gauls 
by the Romans. When Rome was in its glory, Caesar 
crossed the Rhine, and shortly afterwards the whole 
of the river was under the jurisdiction of this great 
empire. When the Twenty-second Legion returned from 
the siege of Jerusalem, Titus sent it to the banks of the 
Rhine, where it continued the work of Martius Agrippa. 
The conquerors required a town to join Melibocus to 
Taunus ; and Moguntiacum, begun by Martius, was 



1 12 THE RHINE. 

planned by the Legion, then enlarged oy Trajan, and 
embellished by Adrian. Singular coincidence ! and 
which we must note in passing. This Twenty-second 
Legion brought with it Crescentius, who was the first 
that carried the word of God into the Rhingau, and 
founded the new religion. God ordained that these ig- 
norant men, who had pulled down the last stone of his 
temple upon the Jordan, should lay the first of ano- 
ther upon the banks of the Rhine. After Trajan and 
Adrian came Julian, who erected a fortress upon the 
confluence of the Rhine and the Moselle ; then Valen- 
tinian, who built a number of castles. Thus, in a few 
centuries, Roman colonies, like an immense chain, 
linked the whole of the Rhine. 

At length the time arrived when Rome was to assume 
another aspect. The incursions of the northern hordes 
were eventually too frequent and of too powerful a cha- 
racter for Rome, and about the sixth century the banks 
of the Rhine were strewed with Roman ruins, as it is at 
present with feudal ones. 

Charlemagne cleared away the rubbish, built fortresses, 
and opposed the German hordes ; but, notwithstanding 
all that he did, notwithstanding his desire to do more, 
Rome died, and the physiognomy of the Rhine was 
changed. 

Already, as I before mentioned, an unperceived germ 
was sprouting in the Rhingau. Religion, that divine 
eagle, began to spread its wings, and deposited amongst 
the rocks an egg that contained the germ of a world. 
Saint Apollinaire, following the example of Crescentius, 
who, in the year 70, preached the word of God at 



THE RHINE. I 13 

Taunus, visited Riefomagum. Saint Martin, Bishop of 
Tours, catechised Confluentia ; Saint Materne, before 
visiting Tongress, resided at Cologne. At Treves Chris- 
tians began to suffer the death of martyrdom, and their 
ashes were swept away by the wind ; but these were not 
lost, for they became seeds, which were germinating in 
the fields during the passage of the barbarians, although 
nothing at that time was seen of them. 

After an historical period the Rhine became linked 
with the marvellous. Where the noise of man is hushed, 
Nature lends a tongue to the nests of birds, causes the 
caves to whisper, and the thousand voices of solitude to 
murmur : whei e historical facts cease, imagination gives 
life to shadows and reality to dreams. Fables took root, 
grew, and blossomed in the voids of history, like 
weeds and brambles in the crevices of a ruined 
palace. 

Civilization, like the sun, has it nights and its days, its 
plenitudes and its eclipses ; now it disappears, but soon 
returns. 

As soon as civilization again dawned upon Taunus, there 
were upon the borders of the Rhine a whole host of le- 
gends and fabulous stories. Populations of mysterious 
beings, who inhabited the now dismantled castles, had 
held communion with the belles files and beaux chevaliers 
of the place. Spirits of the rocks ; black hunters, cross- 
ing the thickets upon stags with six horns ; the maid of 
the black fen ; the six maidens of the red marshes ; Wo- 
dan, the god with ten hands ; the twelve black men ; the 
raven that croaked its song; the devil who placed his 
stone at Teufelstein and his ladder at Teufelsleiter, and 

L3 



114 THE RHINE. 

w ho hal the effrontery to preach publicly at Gernsbach, 
near the Black Forest, but, happily, the word of God was 
heard at the other side of the stream ; the demon Urian, 
who crossed the Khine at Dusseldorf, having upon his 
back the banks that he had taken from the sea-shore, with 
which he intended to destroy Aix-la-Chapelle, but, being 
fatigued with his burden, and deceived by an old woman, 
he stupidly dropped his load at the imperial city, where 
that bank is at present pointed out, and bears the name 
of Loosberg. At that epoch, which for us was plunged in to 
a penumbra, when magic ligh's were sparkling here and 
there, when the ro< ks, the woods, the valleys, were tenant- 
ed by apparitions : mysterious encounters, infernal cas- 
tles, melodious sonys sung by invisible songstresses; and 
frightful bursts of laughter emanating from mysterious 
passengers, these, with a host of other adventures, 
shrouded in impossibility, and holding on by the heel of 
reality, come and go in the legends. 

At last these phantoms disappeared as day burst in 
upon them. Civilization again resumed its sway, and 
fiction gave place to fact. The Rhine then assumed 
another aspect : abbeys and convents increased ; churches 
were built along the banks of the river. The ecclesiastic 
princes multiplied the edifices in the Rhingau, as the pre- 
fects of Rome had done before them. 

The sixteenth century approached : in the fourteenth 
the Rhine witnessed, not far from it, the invention of ar- 
tillery ; and on its left bank, at Strasbourg, a printing- 
office was first established. In 1400 the famous cannon, 
fourteen feet in length, was cast at Cologne ; and in 1472 
Yindelin de Spire printed his Bible. A new world was 



THE RHISE. 115 

niaking its appearance; and. strange to say, it was upon 
the banks of the Rhine that those two mysteryous tools 
with which God unceasingly works out the civilization of 
man, the catapult and the book war and thought, 
took a new form. 

The Rhine, in the destinies of Europe, has a sort of 
providential signification. It is the great moat which di- 
vides the north from the south. The Rhine has seen the 
forms and reflected the shadows of almost all the warriors 
for thirty ages, who tilled the old continent with that 
share which they called a sword. Caesar crossed the 
Rhine in going to the south ; Attila crossed it when de- 
scending to the north. Tt was here that Clovis gained 
the battle of Tolbiac ; and that Charlemagne and Na- 
poleon figured. Frederick Barberousse, Rodolph de 
Hapsbourg, and Frederick the First, were great, victo- 
rious, and formidable when here. For the thinker, who 
is conversant with history, two great eagles are perpe- 
tually hovering over the Rhine that of the Roman 
legions, and the eagle of the French regiments. 

The Rhine that noble flood, which the Romans named 
Rhenus superbus, bore at one time upon its surface bridges 
of boats, over which the armies of Italy, Spain, and 
France poured into Germany, and which, at a later date, 
were made use of by the hordes of barbarians when rush- 
ing into the ancient Roman world: at another, on its 
surface it floated peaceably the fir-trees of Murg and of 
Saint Gall, the porphyry and the marble of Bale, the salt 
of Karlshall, the leather of Stromberg, the quicksilver of 
Lansberg, the wine of Johannisberg, the slates of Coab, 
the cloth and earthenware of Wallendar, the silks and 



116 THE RHINE. 

linens of Cologne. It majestically performs its double func- 
tion of flood of war and flood of peace, having, without 
interruption, upon the ranges of hills which emhank the 
most notable portion of its course, oak-trees on one side 
and vine-trees on the other signifying strength and joy. 

For Homer the Rhine existed not ; for Virgil it was 
only a frozen stream Frigora Rheni ; for Shakspeare it 
was the " beautiful Rhine ;" for us it is, and will be till 
the day when it shall become the grand question of 
Europe, a picturesque river, the resort of the unemployed 
of Ems, of Baden, and of Spa. 

Petrarch visited Aix-la-Chapelle, but I do not think 
he has spoken of the Rhine. 

The left bank belongs naturally to France: Pro- 
vidence, at three different periods, gave it its two 
banks under Pepin-le-Bref, Charlemagne, and Napo- 
leon. The empire of Pepin-le Bref comprised, properly 
speaking, France, with the exception of Aquitaine and 
Gascony, and Germany as far as Bavaria. The empire 
of Charlemagne was twice as large as that of Napoleon. 

It is true that Napoleon had three empires, or, more 
plainly speaking, was emperor in three ways, immedi- 
ately and directly of France, and, by his brothers, of Italy, 
Westphalia, and Holland. Taken in this sense, the 
empire of Napoleon was at least equal to that of Charle- 
magne. 

These emperors were Titans ; they held for a moment 
the universe in their hands, but Death caused them to re- 
lax their hold, and all fell. 

The Rhine has had four distinct phases first, the an- 
tediluvian epoch, volcanoes ; second, the ancient historical 



THE RHINE. 117 

epoch, in which Caesar shone ; third, the marvellous 
epoch, in which Charlemagne triumphed ; fourth, the 
modern historical epoch, when Germany wrest. ed with 
France when Napoleon for a time held his sway. 

And now, to conclude my observations The Rhine 
providential flood seems to be a symbolic stream. 
In its windings, in its course, in the midst of all 
that it traverses, it is, so speaking, the image of civiliza- 
tion, to which it has been so useful, and which it will 
still serve. It flows from Constance to Rotterdam ; from 
the country of eagles to the village of herrings ; from the 
city of popes, of councils, and of emperors, to the counter 
of the merchant and of the citizen ; from the great Alps 
themselves, to that immenie body of water which we 
term ocean. 



LETTER XV. 

THE MOUSE. 

Velmich. Legend of the priest and the silver bell. Giant's tomb. 
Explanation of the Mouse. The solitary inhabitant of the ruin. 

N Saturday last it rained the whole 
of the morning. I had taken my 
passage to Andernach by the Stadt 
Manheim ; but had not proceeded far 
up the Rhine, when suddenly I do 
not know by what caprice, for ordinarily upon the 
lake of Constance the south-west winds, the Favonius of 
Virgil and of Horace, bring storms the immense opaque 
cloud which pended over our heads, burst, and began to 
disperse itself in all directions. Shortly after, a blue 
vault appeared ; and a warm ray of noon caused the tra- 
vellers to leave the cabin and hurry to the deck 

At that moment we passed with vines on the one side, 
and oaks on the other an old and picturesque vil- 
lage on the right bank of the river. It was that of Vel- 




VELMICH. 119 

micb, above which rose, almost vertically, one of those 
enormous banks of lava that resemble the cupola in its 
immeasurable proportions, or the fissure of the trunk of 
a tree when half chopped by the hatchet of the woodman. 
Upon this volcanic mound stands the ruin of a superb 
feudal fortress. On the borders of the river a group of 
young women were busily chatting and beating their 
linen in the rays of the sun. 

This sight was too tempting. I could not pass with- 
out paying the ruin a visit ; for I knew that it was that 
of Velmich the least esteemed and least frequented upon 
the Khine. 

For the traveller, it 
is difficult to ap- 
proach : , and some 
^ say, dangerous ; for 
the peasant, it 
abounds with spec- 
tres, and is the ob- 
ject of frightful 
tales. It is infested 
with living flames, 
which hide themselves by day in subterraneous vaults, 
and at night become visible on the summit of the round 
tower. This enormous turret is an immense ] it, which 
descends far beneath the level of the Rhine. A Seigneur 
of Velmich, called Falkenstein, a name fatal in the le- 
gends, threw into this aperture, unshriven, whomsoever 
he pleased : it is now the troubled souls of those that, 
were thus murdered who inhabit the castle. There was, 
at that epoch, in the steeple of Velmich, a silver bell, 




1*20 LEGEND <>K 

which WAS given by Winifred, Bishop of Mayenne, in the 
year 740, memorable time, when Constantine the Sixth 
was emperor of Rome, at Constantinople. This bell was 
once rung for the prayers of forty hours when a lord of 
Velmich was seriously ill and his life despaired of. Falk- 
enstein, who did not believe in God, and who even doubted 
the existence of the devil, being in want of money, cast 
an envious look upon the handsome bell. He caused it 
to be taken from the church and brought to him. The 
prior of Velmich was much affected at the sacrilege, and 
went, in sacerdotal habiliments, preceded by two children 
of the choir bearing the cross, to demand the bell. Falk- 
enstein burst into a fit of laughter, crying 

" Ah, ah! you wish to have your bell, do you? Well, 
you shall have it; and I warrant it will never leave you 
more." 

Thereupon, the bell was tied round the priest's neck ; 
and both were thrown into the pit of the tower. Then, 
upon the order of Falkenstein, large stones were thrown 
into the pit, filling up about sixty yards of it. A few days 
afterwards, Falkenstein fell ill; and when night came, 
the doctor and the astrologer, who were watching, heard 
with terror the knell of the silver bell coming from the 
depths of the earth. Next morning Falkenstein died. 
Since that time, as regularly as the years roll over, the 
silver bell is heard ringing under the mountains, warn- 
ing the inhabitants of the anniversary of the death of 
Falkenstein. So runs the legend. 

On the neighbouring mountain that on the other side 
of the torrent of Velmich is the tomb of an ancient giant ; 
for the imagination of man he who has seen volcanoes, the 



JHK SILVER BELL. 121 

great forges of nature has put Cyclops wherever the 
mountains smoked, giving to every Etna its Poly- 
phemus. 

I began to ascend the ruins between the souvenir of 
Falkenstein and that of the giant. I must tell you that 
the best way was pointed out to me by the children of 
the village, for which service I allowed them to take some 
of the silver and copper coins of those people from my 
purse ; things the most fantastic, yet still the most in- 
telligible in the world. 

The road is steep, but not at all dangerous, except to 
people subject to giddiness ; or, perhaps, after excessive 
rains, when the ground and rocks are slippery. One 
thing sure is, that this ruin has one advantage over 
others upon the Rhine that of being less frequented. 
No officious person follows you in your ascent ; no 
exhibitor of spectres asks you to "remember him;" 
no rusty door stops you on your way : you climb, 
stride over the old ladder, hold on by tufts of grass ; no 
one helps, nor no one annoys you. At the expiration of 
twenty minutes I reached the summit of the hill, and 
stopped at the threshold of the ruin. Behind me was a 
steep ladder formed of green turf; before me, a lovely 
landscape ; at my feet, the village ; beyond the vil- 
lage, the Rhine, crowned by sombre mountains and 
old castles ; and round and above the mountains, a bright 
blue sky. 

Having taken breath, I began to ascend the steep stair- 
case. At that instant the dismantled fortress appeared 
to me with such a tattered aspect an aspect so wild and 
formidable that I should not have been the least surprised 



122 THE MOUSE. 

to have seen some supernatural form carrying flowers ; 
for instance, Gela, the betrothed of Barberousse; or 
Hildegarde, the wife of Charlemagne, that amiable em- 
press, who was well acquainted with the occult virtues of 
herbs and minerals, and whose foot often trod the 
mountains when she was in search of medicinal plants. 
I looked for a moment towards the north wall, with a 
sort of vague desire to see start from the stones a host of 
hobgoblins, which are " all over the north," as the gnome 
said to Cunon of Sayn, or the three little old women 
singing the legendary song, 

" Sur la tombe du g^ant 
J'ai cueilli trois brins d'orties : 
En fil les ai converties ; 
Prenez, ma sceur, ce present." 

But I was forced to content myself without seeing or even 
hearing anything except the notes of a blackbird perched 
upon some adjoining rock. 

I entered the ruins. The round tower, although the 
summit is partly dismantled, is of a prodigious elevation. 
On all sides are immense walls with shattered windows, 
rooms without doors or roofs, floors without stairs, 
and stairs without chambers. I have often admired the 
carefulness with which Solitude keeps, encloses, and de- 
fends that which man has once abandoned. She barri- 
cades and thicksets the threshold with the strongest 
briers, the most stinging plants, nettles, brambles, thorns 
showing more nails and talons than are in a mena- 
gerie of tigers. 

But Nature is beautiful even in her strangest freaks ; and 
the wild flowers some in bud, others in blossom, and 



THE MOUSE. 123 

some garbed in autumnal foliage present an entangle- 
ment at once startling and beautiful. On this side are 
blue bells and scarlet berries ; on that are the hawthorn, 
gentian, strawberry, thyme, and sloe- tree. To my right 
is a subterraneous passage, the roof falling in; and to my 
left is a tower without any visible aperture. Secluded as 
this spot may seem, the cheerful voices of washerwomen 
on the Rhine are distinctly heard. I clambered from bush 
to bush, explored each aperture, and tried to penetrate 
each vault. 

I forgot to tell you that this huge ruin is called the 
Mouse. I will inform you how it received that appella- 
tion : 

In the twelfth century there was nothing here but a 
small borough, which was watched, and often molested, 
by a strong castle called the Cat. Kuno de Falkenstein, 
who inherited this paltry borough, razed it to the ground, 
and built a castle much larger than the neighbouring 
one; declaring that, " henceforth, it should be the Mouse 
that would devour the Cat/' 

He was right. The Mouse, in fact, although now in 
rnins, is a redoubtable godmother, with its haunches of 
lava and of basalt, and entrails of extinguished vol- 
cano, which, with seeming haughtiness, support it. I do 
not think that any person has had occasion to laugh at 
that mountain which brought forth the Mouse. 

I wandered about the ruins ; first in one room, then 
in another: admiring at one time a beautiful turret; now 
descending into a cave, groping my way through 
some subterraneous passage ; then finding myself look- 



as 2 



124 inn MOUSE. 

ing through an aperture which commanded a view of the 
Rhine. 

The sun at last began to disappear, which is the time 
for spectres and phantoms. I was still in the ruins. 
Indeed, it seemed to me as if I had become a wild school- 
boy. I wandered everywhere ; I climbed up every ac- 
clivity ; I turned over the large stones ; I eat wild mul- 
berries ; I tried by my noise to bring the supernatural 
inhabitants from their hiding-places ; and, as I trod among 
the thick grass and herbs, I inhaled that acerb odour of 
the plants of old ruins which I so much loved in my 
boyhood. 

As the sun descended behind the mountains, I was 
about to follow his example, when 1 was startled by 
something strange moving by my side. I leant forward. 
It was a lizard of an extraordinary size about nine inches 
long with an immense belly, a short tail, a head like 
that of a viper, and black as jet which was gliding slowly 
towards an opening in an old wall. That was the mys- 
terious and solitary inhabitant of the ruin an animal at 
the same time real and fabulous a salamander, which 
looked at me with mildness as it entered its hole. 




LETTER XVI. 

THE MOUSE. 

Colossal profile. The duchy of M. de Nassau. Country sports; their 
punishment. A mountebank. 

COULD not leave this ruin ; several 
timesl began to descend, then re-ascended. 
Nature, like a smiling mother, in- 
dulges us in our dreams and in our ca- 
prices. 

At length, when leaving the Mouse, 
the idea struck me to apply my ear to the basement of 
the large tower. I did so, trusting to hear some noise, 
yet scarcely flattering myself so much as to imagine that 
Winifred's bell would deign to awake itself for me. At 
that moment, O, wonder of wonders ! I heard yes, 
heard with mine own ears a vague, metallic sound, an 
indistinct humming of a bell, gliding through the cre- 
puscule, and, seemingly, coming from beneath the tower. 
I confess that this strange noise brought vividly to my 
memory the speech of Hamlet to Horatio ; but suddenly I 
was recalled from the world of chimeras to that of reality. 

M 3 



126 THE GIANT'S TOMB. 

I soon discovered that it was the Ave Maria of some vil- 
lage floating over the evening breeze, It mattered not. 
All that I had to do was to believe and say that I heard 
the mysterious silver bell of Velmich ringing under the 
mountain. 

As I left the north moat, which is now a thorny ra- 
vine, the tomb of the giant suddenly presented itself. 
From the point where I stood, the rock figures, at the 
base of the mountain, close to the Rhine, the colossal 
profile of a head, hanging backwards, with open mouth. 
One is ready to believe that the giant, who, according to the 
legend, lies there, crushed under the weight of the moun- 
tain, was about to raise the enormous mass, and that, on 
his head appearing between the rocks, an Apollo, or a 
St. Michael, put his foot upon the mountain, and crushed 
the monster, who expired in that posture, uttering a fear- 
ful shriek, which is lost in the darkness of forty ages ; 
but the mouth still remains open. 

I must declare that neither the giant, the silver bell 
nor the spectre of Falkenstein prevents the vine and 
weeds mounting from terrace to terrace near the Mouse. 
So much the worse for the phantoms of this country of 
the grape ; for the people do not hesitate to take the 
vine that clusters round their dismantled dwelling, to pro- 
cure themselves the wherewithal to make wine. 

But the stranger, even the most thirsty, must be cau- 
tious how he plucks the fruit, to him forbidden. At Vel- 
mich we are in the duchy of M. de Nassau, and the laws 
of Nassau are rigorous respecting such country sports. 
The delinquent, if caught, is forced to pay a sum equi 
va'entto the depredations, or " delights," of all those who 



THE MOUNTEBANK. 127 

were lucky enough to escape. A short time ago an Eng- 
lish tourist plucked and ate a plum, for which he had to 
pay fifty florins. 

Wishing to proceed to St. Goar, which is upon the left 
bank, I inquired my way of a mountebank of the village, 
who gave me directions in a gibberish which, of course, 
I did not understand ; for, instead of going by the road 
that runs by the river, I took that which leads to the 
mountain. After walking for a considerable time, I at 
length came in view of the Rhine ; when, through the fog, 
I saw a group of huuses, with faint lights glimmering in 
the windows. Tt was St. Goar. 









LETTER XVII. 

SAINT GOAR. 

The Cat its interior. Fabulous rock of Lurley. The Swiss Valley. 
The fruit girl. The Reichenberg. The Barbers' Village. Legend. 
The Rheinfels. Oberwesel. French hussar. A German supper. 

WEEK might, be very agreeably spent 
at St. Goar, which is a neat little 
town lying between the Cat and the 
Mouse. To the left is the Mouse, 
half enveloped in the fog of the Rhine ; 
and to the right is the Cat, a huge dungeon, with the pic- 
turesque village of Saint Goarshausen lying at its base. 
The two formidable castles seem to be casting angry looks 
across the country, their dilapidated windows presenting 
a most hideous aspect. In front, upon the right bank of 
the river, and apparently ready to incite the two adver- 
saries, is the old colossal spectre palace of the Landgraves 
of Hesse* 

The Rhine at St. Goar, with its sombre embankments, 




THE HOCK OF JLURLEY. 129 

its shadows, its rippling waters, resembles a lake of Jura 
more than it does a river. 

If we remain in the house, we have all day before us a 
view of the Rhine, with rafts floating on its surface. Here 
sailing-vessels, there steam-boats, which, when passing, 
make a noise resembling that of a huge dog when swim- 
ming. In the distance, on the opposite bank, under the 
shade of some beautiful walnut-trees, we see the soldiers 
of M. de Nassau, dressed in red coats and white trousers, 
performing their exercises, while the rolling of the drum 
of a petty duke strikes our ear. Under our windows, the 
women of St. Goar, with their sky-blue bonnets, pass to 
and fro ; and we hear the prattling and laughing of child- 
ren, who are diverting themselves on the river's brink. 

If we go out, we can get across the Rhine for six sous, 
the price of a Parisian omnibns ; then amuse ourselves 
by paying a visit to the Cat, which is an interesting ruin. 
The interior is completely dismantled. The lower room 
of the tower is at present used as a storehouse. Several 
vine-trees twine themselves round it, and even grow upon 
the floor of the portrait- gallery. In a small room, the 
only one that has a window and door, a picture repre- 
senting Bohdan Chmielnicki is nailed to the wall, with 
two or three portraits of reigning princes hung round 
about it. 

From the height of the Cat the eye encounters the 
famed gulf of the Rhine, called the Bank. Between the 
Bank and the square tower of Saint- Goarshausen there 
is only a narrow passage, the gulf being on one side, 
and the rock on the other. A little beyond the Bank, in 
a wild and savage turning, the fabulous rock of Lurley, 



130 THE SWISS VALLEY. 

with its thousand granite seats, which give it the appear- 
ance of a falling ladder, descends into the Rhine. There 
is a celebrated echo here, that responds seven times to all 
that is said and all that is sung. If it were not to appear 
that I wished to detract from the celebrity of the echo, I 
would say that to me the repetition was never above five 
times. It is probable that the Oreade of Lurley, formerly 
courted by so many princes and mythological counts, be- 
gins to get hoarse and fatigued. That poor nymph has 
at present no more than one admirer, who has made him- 
self, on the opposite side of the Rhine, two chambers in 
the rocks, where he passes his days in playing the horn 
and in discharging his gun. The man who gives the 
echo so much employment, is an old brave French hussar. 

The effect of the echo of Lurley is truly extraordinary: 
a small boat, crossing the Rhine at this place, makes a 
tremendous noise ; and, should we shut our eyes, we might 
believe that it was a galley from Malta, with its fifty large 
oars, each moved by four galley-slaves. 

Before leaving Saint Goarshausen, we must go and see, 
in an old street which runs parallel with the Rhine, a 
charming little house of the German Renaissance. After- 
wards we turn to the right, cross a bridge, and enter, 
amidst the noise of a water-mill, the Swiss Valley, a su- 
perb ravine, almost Alpine, formed by the high hill of 
Petersberg, and by the brow of the Lurley. 

The Swiss Valley is certainly a delightful promenade. 
We ascend acclivities ; descend : we meet high villages ; 
plunge into dark and narrow passages, in one of which I 
saw the ground that had lately been torn up by the tusks 
of a wild boar ; or we proceed along the bottom of the 



THE REICHENBERG. 131 

ravine, with rocks resembling the walls of Cyclops on 
each side. Then, if we draw towards the other road, 
which abounds with farms and mills, all that meet the 
eye seem arranged and grouped for Poussin to insert into 
a corner of his landscape : a shepherd, half naked, in a 
field with his flock, contentedly whistling some air ; a 
cart drawn by oxen ; and pretty girls with bare feet. I 
saw one who was indeed charming; sha was seated near 
a fire, drying her fruit : she lifted up her large blue eyes 
towards heaven eyes like diamonds, upon a countenance 
which was darkened by the heat of the sun. Her neck, 
which was partly covered by a collar, was marked with 
small-pox, and under her chin was a swelling. With 
that detraction, joined to such beauty, one might have 
taken her for an Indian idol squatted near its altar. 

We cross a meadow ; the hares of the ravine run here 
and there, and we suddenly behold, at the top of a hill, 
an admirable ruin. It is the Reichenberg, in which, dur- 
ing the wars of " manual rights," in the middle age, one 
of the most redoubtable of those gentlemen bandits, who 
bore the epithet of " the scourge of the country," lived. 
The neighbouring village had cause for lamentation, the 
emperor had reason for summoning the brigand to his 
presence ; but the man of iron, secure in his granite 
house, heeded him not, but continued his depredations, 
his orgies of rapine and plunder, and lived excommuni- 
cated by the church, condemned by the Deity, tracked 
by the emperor, until his white beard descended to his 
stomach. I entered the Reichenberg. There is nothing 
in that cave of Homeric thieves but wild herbs : the win- 
dows are all dismantled, and cows are seen grazing round 
the ru'.ns. 



132 THE BARBERS' VILLAGE. 

Behind the hill of the Reichenberg are the ruins of 
a town, which has all but disappeared, and which bore 
the name of the " BARBERS' VILLAGE." The following 
is the account given of it : 

The devil, wishing to avenge himself on Frederick 
Barberousse for his numerous crusades, took it into his 
head to have the beard of the crusader shaved. He made 
arrangements that the emperor Barberousse, when pass- 
ing through Bacharach, should fall asleep, and, when in 
that state, be shaved by one of the numerous barbers 
of the village. A tricky fairy, as small as a grasshopper, 
went to a giant, and prayed him to lend her a sack. The 
giant consented, and even graciously offered to accom- 
pany her, at which she expressed her extreme delight. 
The fairy, after walking by the side of such a huge crea- 
ture, had, no doubt, swelled herself into a tolerable bulk, 
for, on arriving at Bacharach, she took the sleeping 
barbers, one by one, and placed them in the sack ; after 
which, she told the giant to put it upon his back, and to 
take it away that it did not matter where it was placed. 
It being night, the giant did not perceive what the old 
woman had done ; he obeyed her, and strode off with his 
accustomed strides The barbers of Bacharach, heaped 
one over another, awoke, and began to move in 
the sack The giant, through fright, increased his 
pace. As he traversed the Reichenberg, one of the bar- 
bers, who had his razor in his pocket, drew it out, and 
made so large a hole in the sack that all the barbers fell 
out, screaming frightfully The giant, thunderstruck, 
imagining that he had a nest of devils on his back, saved 
himself by means of his enormous legs. When the em- 



THE BHETNFELS. 133 

peror arrived at Bacharach there was not a barber in 
the place ; and, on Beelzebub coming to see the deed per- 
formed, a raven, perched upon the gate of the town, said 
to his grace the devil 

" My friend, in the middle of your face you have some- 
thing so large that you could not see it even in a looking- 
glass. That is un pied de nez.'' 

Since that time there has been no barber at Bachar- 
ach ; and even to this day, it is impossible to find a 
shop belonging to one of the fraternity. As for those 
stolen by the fairies, they established themselves where 
they fell, and built a town upon the spot, which they 
called the " Barbers' Village." Thus it is that the Em^ 
peror Frederick the First preserved his beard and his 
surname. 

Besides the Mouse, the Cat, the Lurley, the Swiss 
Valley, and the Reichenberg, there is also near St. Goar 
the once formidable castle that shook before Louis the 
Fourteenth, and crumbled under Napoleon, the Rhein- 
fels. 

About a mile from St. Goar we perceive, at the side 
of two mountains, a handsome feudal town, with an- 
cient streets, fourteen embattled towers, and two large 
churches of Gothic structure. It is Oberwesel, a town of 
the Rhine, which was often the seat of war. Its old walls 
exhibit innumerable holes, the effects of the cannon-ball. 
At present Oberwesel, like an old soldier, has become a 
vine-dresser. The red wine here is excellent. 

Like all other towns upon the Rhine, Oberwesel has 
near it a castle in ruins Schoenberg ; where, in the tenth 
Century, the seven laughing and cruel girls lived that 



134 A GERMAN SUPPER. 

were turned, in the middle of the river, into seven 
rocks. 

The road from St. Goar to Oberwesel is full of attrac- 
tions. It runs along the Rhine, which is at times hidden 
from our view hy hawthorn-trees and willows. All 
here is still, all is tranquil, save at intervals, when the 
pervading silence is broken by a silvery salmon leaping 
to catch its prey. 

In the evening, after we have taken one of those de- 
lightful walks which tend to open the deep caverns of the 
stomach, we return to Saint Goar, and find, at the top 
of a long table, surrounded by smokers, an excellent 
German supper, with partridges larger than chickens. 
We recruit our strength marvellously ; above all, if our 
appetite be so good as to permit us to overlook a few of 
the strange rencontres which often take place on the same 
plate for instance, a roast duck with an apple-pie, or 
the head of a wild boar with preserves. Just before the 
supper draws to a close, a flourish of a trumpet, mingling 
with the report of a gun, is suddenly heard. We hurry 
to the window. It is the French hussar, who is rousing 
from dormancy the echo of St. Goar, which is not less 
marvellous than that of Lurley. Each gunshot is equal 
to the report of a cannon : each blast of a trumpet 
is echoed with singular distinctness in the profound dark- 
ness of the valley. It is an exquisite symphony, which 
seems to be mocking while it pleases us. As it is im- 
possible to believe that this huge mountain can produce 
such an effect, at the expiration of a few minutes we 
become dupes of illusion, and the most grave thinker is 
ready to swear that in those shades, under some fantastic 
thicket, dwells a solitary a supernatural being a sort of 



THE ECHO. 135 

fairy a Titania, who arouses herself by delicately paro- 
dying the music of mortals, and throwing down the half 
of a mountain every time she hears the report of a gun. 
The effect would be still greater if we could, for a short 
time, forget that we are at the window of an inn, and that 
that extraordinary sensation has served as an extra plate 
to the dessert. But all passes away very naturally ; the 
performance over, a waiter belonging to the auberge en- 
ters, with a tin plate in his hand, which he presents to 
the inmates. Then all is finished ; and each retires after 
having paid for his echo. 



LETTER XVIII 




BACHARACH. 

Fursteraberg, Sonnech, and Heimberg. Europe. A happy Httle world. 
The cemetery. 

HIS moment I am in one of the old- 
est, the prettiest, and the most un 
known towns in the world. At my 
window are cages full of birds ; from 
the roof of my room hangs an old- 
fashioned lantern ; and in the corner 
is a ray of the sun, imperceptibly but gradually advan- 
cing towards an old oak table. 

I remained three days at Bacharach, which is, with- 
out exception, the most antique group of human habita- 
tions that I have ever seen. One might imagine that 
some giant, a vendor of bric-a-bac, purposing to open a 
shop upon the Rhine, had taken a mountain for his coun- 
ter, and placed, from the bottom to the top, with a giant 
taste, heaps of enormous curiosities. 



BACHARACH. 137 

This old, fairy town, in which romance and legend 
abound, is peopled by inhabitants who old and young, 
from the urchin to the grandfather, from the young girl to 
the old dame have, in their cast of features and in their 
walk, something of the thirteenth century. From the 
summit of the Schloss we have an immense view, and 
discover, in the embrasures of the mountain, five- other 
castles in ruins ; upon the left bank of the river, Furs- 
temberor, Sonneck, and Heimberg ; to the west, on the 
other side of the Rhine, Goutenfels, full of recollec- 
tions of Gustave Adolphe ; and, towards the east, above 
the fabulous valley of Wisperthall, the manor, where the 
inhospitable Sibo de Lorch refused to open the door to 
the gnomes on stormy nights. 

At Bacharach a stranger is looked upon as a phe- 
nomenon. The traveller is followed with eyes expres- 
sive of bewilderment. In fact, no one, except it be 
a poor painter, plodding his way on foot, with a bag 
upon his back, ever deigns to visit this antique capital 
this town of melancholy. 

I must not, however, forget to mention that in the room 
adjoining mine hangs a picture purporting to represent 
Europe. Two lovely girls, their shoulders bare, and a 
handsome young fellow are singing. The following stanza 
is underneath : 

" Enchanting Europe ! where all-smiling France 
Gives laws to fashion, graces to the dance : 
Pleasure, fine arts, each sweet and lovely face 
Form the chief worship of thy happy race." 

Under my window was an entire little world, happy 

1*8 



138 



THE CEMETERY. 



and charming a kind of court, adjoining a Roman church, 
which \ve could approach by a dilapidated stair. Three 
little boys and two little girls were playing among the 
grass, which reached their chins ; the girls every now 
and then fighting voluntarily with the boys. The ages 
of all five could not amount to more than fifty years. Be- 
yond the long grass were trees loaded with fruit. In the 
midst of the leaves were two scare-crows, dressed like Lu- 
bins, of the Comic Opera ; and although, perhaps they had 
the effect of frightening the birds, they failed to do 
that to the bergeronettes. In all corners of the gar- 
den were flowers glittering in the rays of the sun, and 
round these flowers were swarms of bees and butter- 
flies. The bees hummed, the children chattered, the 
birds sang, and at a little distance were two doves hap- 
pily billing. 

After having ad- 
mired till night- 
fall this charming 
little garden, I 
took a fancy to 
visit the ruin of 
the old church, 
which is de- 
dicated to St. 
Werner, who suf- 
ered martyrdom at Oberwesel. I reached the first 
flight of steps, which were covered with grass, looked 
round, admired the heavens, from which sufficient 
light came to enable me to see the old palatine castle in 




THE CEMETERY. 189 

ruins ; then my eyes fell upon my charming garden of 
children, birds, doves, bees, butterflies, and music my 
garden of life, of love, and of joy, and I discovered that 
it was a cemetery. 



LETTER XIX. 

" FIRE ! FIRE !" 

Lorch. An incident. Combat of the Hydra and Dragon. The Hotel 
P at Lorch. 

HEN twelve strikes at Bacharach we 
go to bed we shut our eyes we try 
to dispel the thoughts of day we come 
to that state when we have, at the same 
time, something awake, and something 
asleep when the fatigued body re- 
poses, and when the wayward mind is still at labour. 
When thus, between the mind and body we are nei- 
ther asleep nor awake, a noise suddenly disturbs the 
shades of night an inexpressible, a singular noise, a 
kind of faint murmuring at once menacing and plaintive, 
which mingles with the night wind, and seems to come 
from the high cemetery situated above the village. You 
awake, jump up, listen. What is that ? It is the watch- 
man blowing: his trumpet to assure the inhabitants that 




LORCH. 141 

all is well, and that they may sleep without fear. Be it 
so ; still I think it impossible to adopt a more frightful 
method. 

A.t Lorch a person might be awoke out of his sleep in 
a manner still more dramatical ; but, my friend, let me 
first tell you what sort of a place Lorch is. 

Lorch, a large borough containing about eighteen 
hundred inhabitants, is situated upon the right bank of 
the Rhine, and extends as far as the mouth of the Wis- 
per. It is the valley of legends, it is the country of 
faries. Lorch is situated at the foot of the Devil's Lad- 
der, a high rock, almost perpendicular, which the valiant 
Gilgen clambered when in search of his betrothed, who 
was hidden by the gnomes on the summit of a mountain. 
It was at Lorch that the fairy Ave invented so say the 
legends the art of weaving, in order to clothe her lover 
Heppius. The first red wine of the Rhine was made 
here. Lorch existed before Charlemagne, and it has left 
a date in its charter as far back as 732. Henry the Third, 
Archbishop of Mayence, resided here in 1348. At pre- 
sent [there are neither Roman cavaliers, nor faries, nor 
archbishops, yet the little town is happy, the scenery is 
delightful, and the inhabitants are hospitable. The lovely 
house of the Renaissance, on the border of the Rhine, 
has a fa9ade as original and as rich in its kind as that 
of the French manor of Meillan. The fortress, teeming 
with legends of old JSibo, protects, as it were, the borough 
from the historical castle of Furstemburg, which me- 
naces it with its huge tower. There is nothing more 
charming than to see this smiling little colony of peasants, 
prospering beneath those two frightful skeletons which 
were once citadels. 



142 FIRE ! FIRE! 

A week ago, perhaps it was about one in the morning, 
I was writing in.my room, when suddenly I perceived the 
paper under my pen become red, and, on lifting my eyes 
I discovered that the light did not proceed from my lamp, 
but from my window, while a strange humming noise rose 
around me. I hastened to ascertain the cause. An im- 
mense volume of flame and smoke was issuing from the 
roof above my head, making a frightful noise. It was 

the Hotel P the house adjoining mine, which had 

taken fire. 

In an instant the inmates of the auberge were awake, 
all the village was astir, and the cry "Fire ! Fire !" was 
heard in every street. I shut my window, and opened 
the door. The large wooden staircase of my hotel, which 
had two windows, almost touched the burning house, and 
seemed also to be in flames. From the top to the bottom 
of the stairs, a crowd of shadows, loaded with divers things, 
was seen pressing, jostling, and making way, with all pos- 
sible speed, either to the top or to the bottom. It was 
the inmates of the auberge removing their effects, one 
nearly naked, this one in drawers, that one in his shirt ; 
they seemed scarcely awake. No one cried out no one 
spoke. It was like the humming of an ant-hillock. 

As for me, for each thinks of himself at such a time, 
I had little luggage. I lodged on the first floor, therefore 
ran no other risk than that of being forced to make my 
escape by the window. 

In the meanwhile, a storm arose, and the rain came 
down in torrents. As it always happens, the more haste 
the less speed. A moment of frightful confusion ensued ; 
some wished to enter,, others to go out : drawers and 



COMBAT OF THE HYDRA AND DRAGON. 143 

tables, attached to ropes, wers lowered from the windows; 
and mattresses, nightcaps, and bundles of linen, were 
thrown from the top of the house on to the pavement. Wo- 
men were wringing their hands in despair, and children 
crying. Just as the fire gained the granary, the fire-en- 
gines arrived. It is almost impossible to give an idea of the 
rage with which the water attacked its enemy. No sooner 
had the pipes passed over the wall than a hissing sound was 
heard ; and the flame, on which a stream of molten steel 
seemed pouring, roared, became erect, leaped frightful- 
ly, opened horrible mouths, and, with its innumerable 
tongues, licked at once all the doors and windows of the 
burning edifice. The vapour mingled with the smoke, 
volumes of which were dispersed with every breath of 
wind, and lost themselves, twisting and wreathing, in the 
darkness of the night, whilst the hissing of the water re- 
sponded to the roaring of the fire. There is nothing more 
terrible and more grand than the awful combat of the 
hydre and dragon. 

The strength of the water forced up in columns by the 
engines was extraordinary ; the slates and bricks on which 
it alighted, broke and were scattered by its force. When 
the timber- works gave way the sight was grand. 
Amidst noise and smoke, myriads of sparks issued from the 
flames. For a few minutes a chimney-stack stood alone 
upon the house, like a kind of stone tower ; but no sooner 
was the pipe pointed towards it than it fell heavily into 
the gulf. The Rhine, the villages, the mountains, the 
ruins all the spectres of the country were observable 
amidst the smoke, and flames, and storm. It was truly a 
frightful sight, yet it had something of sublimity in it. 



144 THE HOTEL P AT LORCM. 

If looked at in detail, nothing was more singular than 
to see, at intervals, amongst smoke and flame, heads of 
men appearing everywhere. These men were directing 
the water-pipes on the flames, which jumped, advanced, 
and receded. Large blocks of wood work were detached 
from the roof, and hung dangling by a nail, while others 
fell amidst noise and sparks. In the interior of the 
apartments the decorated paper of the walls appeared and 
disappeared with every blast of wind. There was upon the 
wall of the third floor a picture of Louis XV., surrounded 
with shepherds and shepherdesses. I watched this land- 
scape with particular interest. For some time it withstood 
the fire; but at last one body of flame entered the room 
stretched forth one of its tongues, and seized the land- 
scape; the females embraced the males; Tircis cajoled 
Glyeere : then all disappeared in smoke. 

A short distance from the auberge was a group of half- 
naked English, with pale countenances, and looks ex- 
pressive of bewilderment. They were standing by the 
goods which had been providentially saved. On their 
left was an assemblage of all the children of the place, 
who laughed on seeing a block of wood precipitated into 
the burning element, and clapped their hands every time 
the water- works happened to play amongst them. Such 
was the fire of the Hotel P at Lorch. 

A house on fire is at best a house burning; but, what is 
still more melancholy, a man lost his life at it, while in the 
act of doing good to others. 

About four o'clock in the morning the people became 
what is generally termed masters of the fire, and succeeded 
in confining the flames to the Hotel P , thus saving 



A CURRENT STORY. 145 

ours. A host of servants, brushing, scraping, rubbing, 
and sponging, attacked the rooms, and in less than an 
hour our inn was washed from top to bottom. One 
thing is singular nothing was stolen ! All those goods, 
removed in haste amidst the rain, in the dead of the 
night, were scrupulously carried back by the poor pea- 
sants of Lorch. 

Next morning I was surprised to see, on the ground^ 
floor of the inn that was burnt, two or three rooms per- 
fectly entire, which did not seem to be the least disor- 
dered by the fire that had raged above them. A propos 
of this fact, the following story passes current in this 
country ; however, I do not credit it : 

A few years ago an Englishman arrived somewhat 
late at an inn at Braubach, supped, and went to bed. 
In the middle of the night the auberge took fire. The 
servants entered the apartment of the Englishman, and, 
finding him asleep, awoke him, and told him what had 
happened, and that he must make all speed out of the 
house. 

" To the d 1 with you !'' said the Englishman, not 

at all pleased with his nocturnal visitants. " You awake 
me for that ? Leave me alone : I am fatigued, and will 
not get up ! you seem to be a parcel of fools to imagine 
that I am going to run through the fields in my shirt at 
such an hour as this ! Nine hours is the amount of time 
which I allow for rest. Put out the fire the best way 
you can I will not hinder you ! As for me, I am very 
well in bed, where I intend to remain. Good night ! 
I will see you to-morrow. 

No sooner had he said so than he turned his back 

o 



156 A CURRENT STORY. 

upon the servants, and fell fast asleep. What was to be 
done ? The fire gained ground ; and the inmates, to 
save themselves, fled, after shutting the door upon the 
Englishman, who was soundly sleeping, and snoring 
tremendously. The fire was terrible, but at last was, 
with great difficulty, extinguished. Next morning the 
men who were clearing the rubbish came to the chamber 
of the Englishman, opened the door, and found him in 
bed. On perceiving them he said, yawning 

" Can you tell me if there is such a thing as a boot- 
hook in this house ?" 

He rose, breakfasted heartily, and appeared quite re- 
freshed a circumstance greatly to the displeasure of the 
lads of the place, who had made up their minds to 
make what is called in the valley of the Rhine a bourg- 
mestre sec with the Englishman that is, a smoked corpse ; 
which they show to strangers for a few liards. 



LETTER XX. 

FROM LORCH TO BINGEN. 

Travelling on foot; its advantages and pleasures. The strange ren- 
contre. A dangerous spectator. The explication. Actors on a 
holiday. Marvellous facts and their connection with the " holiday 
of a menagerie." Furstemburg Castle. The three brothers, Cadenet, 
Luynes, and Bradnes. The three students. Sublimity of Nature. 
Ruin. The enigma. Falkenburg castle. The blooming group, 
Stella. Gantrum and Liba. Mausethurm. Hatto and the legend of 
the rats. 

ORCH is about four French leagues 
from Bingen. You are well aware 
of my taste. Whenever an oppor- 
tunity is offered, I never neglect 
converting my excursion into a pro- 
^ menade. 

Nothing to me is more pleasing than travelling on foot. 
We are free and joyous. No breaking down of wheels, 
no contingencies attendant on carriages. We set out ; 
stop when it suits us ; breakfast at a farm or under a 
tree ; walk on, and dream while walking for travelling 
cradles reverie, reverie veils fatigue, and the beauty of 
the country hides the length of the road. We are not tra- 

o2 




148 AN ADTENTURE. 

rolling, we wander. Then we stop under the shade of a 
tree, by the side of a little rivulet, whose rippling waters 
harmonize with the songs of the birds that load the 
blanches over our heads. I saw with compassion a 
diligence pass before me, enveloped in dust, and con- 
taining tired, screwed-up, and fatigued passengers. 
Strange that those poor creatures, who are often persons 
of mind, should willingly consent to be shut up in a place 
where the harmony of the country sounds only in noise, 
the sun appears to them in clouds, and the road in whirl- 
winds of dust. They are not aware of the flowers that 
are found in thickets, of the pearls that are picked up 
amongst pebbles, of the Houris that the fertile imagination 
discovers in landscapes! musa pedestris Everything 
comes to the foot-passenger. Adventures are ever pass- 
ing before his eyes. 

I remember being, some seven or eight years ago, at 
Claye, which is a few leagues from Paris. I will tran- 
scribe the lines which I found in my note-book, for they 
are connected with the story that I am going to relate. 

" A canal for a ground -floor, a cemetery for a first, and 
a few houses for a second such is Claye. The cemetery 
forms a terrace over the canal ; thus affording the manes 
of the peasants of Claye a probable chance of being sere- 
naded by the mail packet which runs from Paris to Meaux. 
In this place the dead are not interred ; they are ." 

I was returning to Paris on foot, and had set out 
early : the trees of the forest of Bondy tempted me to go 
by a road which had a sharp turning, where I seated 
myself my back against an oak, my feet hanging over 
a ditch and began to write in my green book, the 



AN ADVENTURE. 149 

note you have just read. As I was finishing the fourth 
line I lifted my eyes, and perceived, not many yards from 
where I was, a bear, with its eyes fixed upon me. In 
broad daylight we have no nightmares, nor can we be 
dupes enough to take the stump of a tree for something 
supernatural. At night, things may change in appear- 
ance ; but at noon, with a May sun over our heads, we 
have no such hallucinations. It was actually a bear a 
living bear a hideous-looking animal, which was seated 
on its hind legs, with its fore-paws crossed over its belly. 
One of its ears was torn, as also was its under lip : it 
had only one eye, with which it looked at me attentively. 
There was no woodman at hand all around me was 
silent and deserted. I must say that I felt a strange 
sensation. Sometimes, when chance brings us into contact 
with a strange dog, we manage to get over the difficulty by 
shouting out "Fox," " Solomon," or "Asor;" but what 
could we say to a bear ? From whence did it come ? Why 
such a creature in the forest of Bondy, upon the highway 
from Paris to Claye ? It was strange, unreasonable, and 
anything but pleasing. I moved not ; I must also say 
that the bear did not move, a circumstance which appeared 
to me somewhat lucky. It looked at me as tenderly as 
a bear could well do with one eye ; it opened its mouth, 
not in ferocity, but yawningly. This bear had something 
of peace, of resignation, and of drowsiness; and I found 
a likeness in its physiognomy to those old stagers that 
listen to tragedies. In fact, its countenance pleased me 
so much that I resolved to put as good a face upon the 
matter as I could. I therefore accepted it for a spectator, 
and continued what I had begun. I then wrote the 

o 3 



150 AN ADVENTURE. 

fifth line in my book ; which line is at a considerable dis- 
tance from the fourth, for, on beginning it, I had my 
eyes fixed upon the eye of the bear. 

Whilst I was writing a large fly lighted on the bleed- 
ing ear of my spectator. It slowly lifted its right paw, 
and passed it leisurely over its ear, as a cat might do. The 
fly took to its wings ! the bear looked after it : then he 
seized his hind legs with his fore paws ; and, as if satisfied 
with that classic attitude, began again to eye me. I 
admit that I watched his movements with no slight de- 
gree of interest. 

Just as I was about to begin the sixth line, I heard a 
sound of feet on the high road, and suddenly I perceived 
another bear, a huge black animal, which had no sooner 
fixed its eyes upon the former than it ran up to it and 
rolled graciously at its feet. The first was a she- bear, 
and did not deign to look upon the black one ; and for- 
tunately the latter paid no attention to me. 

I confess that at this new apparition, which was some- 
what perplexing, my hand trembled. I was then writing, 
" Claye, a probable chance of being serenaded." In my 
manuscript I see there is a great space between the 
words "probable chance,'* and " of being serenaded.'* 
That space signifies " a second bear !" 

Two bears ! What did all this mean ? Judging from 
whence the black one made its appearance, it waa 
natural to imagine that it had come from Paris ; a city 
little abounding with betes, at least of such savage 
natures. 

I remained petrified bewildered with my eyes fixed 
upon the hideous animals, which began to roll lovingly 



AN ADVENTURE. 15} 

in the dust. I rose, and was making up my mind 
whether I should pick up my cane, which had fallen 
into the ditch, when another appeared, less in size, more 
deformed, and bleeding like the first ; then came a fourth, 
a fifth, and a sixth. The last four walked along the road 
like soldiers on the march. This was truly inexplicable. 
A moment afterwards I heard the shouting of men, 
mingling with the barking of dogs ; then beheld ten or 
twelve bulldogs, and seven or eight men : the latter were 
armed with large sticks, tipped v, 1th iron, and were carry- 
ing muzzles in their hands. One of them stopped, and, 
whilst the others collected and muzzled the animals, he 
explained to me this strange enigma. The master of the 
Circus of the Barriere du Combat, profiting by the 
Easter devotions, was sending his bears and dogs to 
Meaux, where he intended giving a few exhibitions. 
All these animals travelled on foot, and had been unmuz- 
zled at the last stage, to afford them an opportunity of 
eating by the roadside. Whilst the keepers were com- 
fortably seated in a neighbouring cabaret, the bears, 
finding themselves alone, joyous of liberty, stole a march 
upon their masters. 

Such was one of the adventures of my pedestrian 
excursions the rencontre of" actors" on a half-holiday. 

Dante, in the commencement of his poem, states that 
he met one day a panther in a wood ; after which, a lion ; 
then, a bear. If we give credit to tradition, the Seven 
Wise Men of Greece had similar adventures. Thales, of 
Milet, was, for a long time, followed by a griffon ; Bias 
de Priene walked side by side with a lynx ; Solon, of 
Athens, bravely confronted a mad bull ; Cleohulus, of 



152 FUE6TEMBURG CASTLE. 

Rhodes, met a lion ; and Chilo, of Macedonia, a lioness. 
All these marvellous facts, if properly examined, might 
be found to have some connection with the "holiday" of 
a menagerie. If I had related my story of the bears in a 
manner more redounding to my valour, perhaps in a few 
hundred years I should have passed for a second Orpheus. 
Dictus ob hoc lenire tigres. You perceive, my friend, 
that poor " acting" bears give rise to many prodigies. 
Without offence to the ancient poets or Greek philoso- 
phers, I must confess that, to me, a strophe would be 
but a feeble weapon against a leopard, or the power of a 
syllogism against a hyena. Man has found the secret of 
degrading the lion and the tiger of adding stupidity to 
ferocity. Perhaps it is well : for, had it not been so, I 
should have been devoured ; and the Seven Wise Men of 
Greece would have shared the same fate. 

Since my boyhood I have always derived extreme de- 
light from travelling on foot, for in many of my pedes- 
trian trips I have met with adventures which have left a 
pleasing impression behind . 

The other day, about half-past five in the morning, 
after having given orders for my baggage to be trans- 
ported to Bingen, I left Lorch, and took a boat to convey 
me to the other side of the river. If you should ever be 
here, do the same. The Roman and Gothic ruins of the 
right bank are much more interesting to the traveller than 
the slate-roofed houses of the left. At six I was seated, 
after a somewhat difficult ascent, upon the summit of a 
heap of extinguished lava, which overlooks Furstem- 
burg Castle and the valley of Diebach. After viewing 
this old castle, which in 1321, 1632, and 1689, was the 



THE THREE BROTHERS. 153 

seat of European struggles, I descended. I left the vil- 
lage, and was walking joyously along, when I met three 
painters, with whom I exchanged a friendly "good day." 
Every time that I see three young men travelling on foot, 
whose eyeballs shine as if they reflected the fairy-land 
of the future, I cannot prevent myself from wishing that 
their chimeras may be realized, and from thinking of the 
three brothers, Cadenet, Luynes, andBrandes* who, two 
hundred years ago, set out one beautiful morning for the 
court of Henry IV., having amongst them only one man- 
tle, which each wore in turn. Fifteen years afterwards, 
under Louis XIII., one of them became Duke of Chaul- 
nes ; the second, Constable of France; and the third, Duke 
of Luxembourg! Dream on then, young men persevere 1 

Travelling by threes seems to be the fashion upon the 
borders of the Rhine, for I had scarcely reached Neider- 
heimbach when I met three more walking together. 

They were evidently students of some of those noble 
universities which tend so much to civilize Germany. 
They wore classic caps, had long hair, tight frock-coats, 
sticks in their hands, pipes in their mouths, and, like 
painters, wallets upon their backs. They appeared to be 
conversing with w r armth, and were apparently going to 
Bacharach. In passing, one of them cried out, on salut- 
ing me 

" Die nobis domne, in quaparte corporis a nimam veteres 
locant phUosophi . ? " 

I returned the salutation, and replied, " In corde Plato % 
in sanguine Empedocles, inter duo supercilia Lucretius." 

The three young men smiled, and the eldest cried 
ll Vivat Gallia regina!" I replied, *' Vivat Germania ma~ 
tttr /" We then saluted each other, and passed on. 



154 SUBLIMITY OF NATURE. 

Above Neiderheimbach is the sombre forest of Sann, 
where, hid among trees, are two fortresses in ruins: 
the one, that of Heimburg, a Roman castle ; the other, 
Sonneck, once the abode of brigands. The Em- 
peror Rodolph demolished Sonneck in 1212 ; time has 
since crumbled Heimburg. A ruin still more awe- 
striking is hid among the mountains Falkenburg. 

I had, as I have already stated, left the village behind 
me. An ardent sun was above, but the fresh breeze from 
the river cooled the air around. To my right, between 
two rocks, was the narrow entry of a charming ravine, 
abounding with shadows. Swarms of little birds were 
chirping joyously, and in love chasing each other amongst 
the thick leaves ; a streamlet, swollen by the rains, dashed, 
torrent-like, over the herbage, frightened the insects, and, 
when falling from stone to stone, formed little cascades 
among the pebbles. I discovered along this stream, in 
the darkness which the trees shed around, a road, that a 
thousand wild flowers the water-lily, the amaranth, the 
everlasting, the iris hide from the profane and deck for 
the poet. You are aware that there are moments when I 
almost believe in the intelligence of inanimate things : it 
appeared to me as if I heard a thousand voices exclaim 

"Where goest thou ? Seekest thou places untrod by 
human foot, but where divinity has left its trace ? Thou 
wishest thy soul to commune with solitude ; thou wishest 
light and shadow, murmurings and peace, changes and 
serenity ; thou wishest the place where the Word is heard 
in silence, where thou seest life on the surface and eter- 
nity at the bottom ; thou lovest the desert ; thou hatest 
not man ; thou seekest the greensward, the moss, the 



SUBLIMITY OF NATURE. 155 

humid leaves, tall branches, birds which warble, run- 
ning waters, perfume mingling with the air. Well, en- 
ter ; this is thy way. 

It required no consideration. I entered the ravine. 
To tell you all that I did there, or, rather, what soli- 
tude did to me how the wasps buzzed round the violets, 
how the wings of birds rustled among the leaves that 
which startled in the moss, that which chirped in the nest, 
the soft and indistinct sound of vegetation, the beauty 
of the bull-fly, the activity of the bee, the patience of the 
spider, the opening of flowers, the lamentations, the dis- 
tant cries, the struggling of insect with insect, the exha- 
lations of the rocks, which, sighingly, reached the ear 
the rays of heaven which pierced through the trees, the 
drops of water that fell, like tears, from flowers the half 
revelations which came from the calm, harmonious, 
slow, and continued labour of all those creatures and of 
all those things which are more in connexion with God 
than with man ; to tell you all that, my friend, would be 
to express the ineffable, to show the invisible, to paint 
infinity ! What did I do there ? I no longer know. As 
in the ravine of Saint Goarshausen, I wandered, rumina- 
ted : and, in adoring, prayed ! What was I thinking of ? 
Do not ask me. There are moments, you are aware, 
when our thoughts float as drowned in a thousand con- 
fused ideas. 

I at last reached I do not know how the summit of 
a very high hill, covered with short broom. In all my 
excursions upon the banks of the Rhine, I saw nothing 
so beautiful. As far as the eye could reach were prairies, 
waters, and magic forests resembling bunches of green 



156 THE STATUE. 

feathers. It was one of those places where we imagine 
we see the tail of that magnificent peacock which we call 
Nature. 

Behind the hill on which I was seated, on the summit 
of a mount covered with fir and chesnut trees, I perceived 
a sombre ruin, a colossal heap of brown basalt, in the 
form of a citadel. What castle was it ? I could not tell, 
for I did not know where I was. To examine a ruin at 
hand is my manie ; therefore, at the expiration of a quar- 
ter of an hour, I was wandering through it, searching, 
foraging, and turning over huge stones, with the hope of 
finding an inscription which would throw some light 
upon this venerable ruin. 

On leaving the lower chamber, the corner of a stone, 
one end buried in the rubbish, struck my view. I imme- 
diately stooped, and with tty hands and feet cleared 
everything away, under the impression of finding upon 
it the name of this mysterious ruin. On this large block 
of stone, the figure of a man, clothed in armour, but with- 
out a head, was sculptured, and under his feet were the 
following lines : 

"VOX TACVIT PERIIT LUX. NOX RVIT KT RTIT VMBRA VIR 
CARET IN TVMBA ^VO CARET EFFIGIES." 

I was still in ignorance. This castle was an enigma. I 
had sought for words ; I had found them : that is, an in- 
scription without a date an epitaph without a name a 
statue without a head. While buried in reflection, a 
distinct sound of voices reached me. I listened. It was 
a quick dialogue, a few words only of which I could dis- 
tinguish amid the shouts of laughter and of joy. These 



FALKENBURG CASTLE. 157 

"fall of the mountain Subterraneous passage 
Very ogly footpath" On rising from the tombstone, I 
beheld three young girls, clothed in white, with fair faces, 
smiling cheeks, and bright blue eyes. Nothing could be 
more magical, more charming, for a reveur, so situated, 
than this apparition. It would have been pardonable for 
a poet to have taken them for angels, or saints of heaven ; 
I must affirm that, to me, they were only three English 
girls. 

It suddenly crossed my mind that by profiting by these 
angels I might find, without further trouble, the name 
of the castle. They spoke English; therefore I con- 
cluded they belonged to that country. To give me coun- 
tenance, I opened my portfolio, called to my aid the little 
English of which I was master, then began to look into 
the ravine, murmuring to myself " Beautiful view ! 
Very fine ! Very pretty waterfall !" &c. &c. 

The young girls, surprised at my sudden appearance, 
began, while stifling their laughs, to whisper to each 
other. They looked charming, but were evidently laugh- 
ing at me. I summoned up courage, advanced a few 
steps towards the blooming group, which remained sta- 
tionary, and saluting, with my most gracious air, the 
eldest of the three, uttered 

" What, if you please, is the name of his castle ? " 
The sweet girl smiled, looked at her two companions, 
and, slightly blushing, replied in French 

" I believe, sir, it is called Falkenburg. At least, a 
French gentleman, who is now speaking with my father 
in the Grand Tower, said so. If you will take the trouble 
to go round that way, sir, you will meet them " These 



158 THE THREE SISTERS. 

words, so much to the point, and spoken with a pure 
French accent, sufficed to convince me of my mistake ; 
but the charming creature took the trouble of adding 

"We are not English, sir; we are French ; and you 
are from France!" 

"How do you know, miss," I replied, " that I am a 
Frenchman ?" 

" By your English," the youngest replied. 

The eldest sister looked at her with an air of severity 
that is, if beauty, grace, youth, innocence, and joy, can 
have a severe air. For my part, I burst into a fit of 
laughter. 

"But, young ladies,'' I said, " you, yourselves, were 
speaking English a few minutes ago." 

" It was only for amusement," the youngest replied. 

"For exercise," said the other, chidingly. 

This flat and motherly rectification was lost upon the 
young girl, who ran gaily to the tombstone, raising 
slightly her gown, on account of the stones, and display- 
ing the prettiest foot imaginable. "Oh!" she cried, 
" come and see this ! It is a statue it has no head it 
is a man !" 

The other two joined their sister ; and a minute after- 
wards all three were upon the tomb, the sun reflecting 
their handsome profiles upon the granite spectre. A few 
minutes ago I was asking myself the name of the deca- 
pitated warrior, then I asked myself the names of the 
young girls ; and I cannot tell you what I felt when see- 
ing, thus together, those two mysteries, the one full of 
horror, the other full of charms. 

By listening to their soft whisperings I discovered the 



S-TELLA. 159 

name of the second. She was the prettiest a true prin- 
cess for fairy tales. Her long eyelashes half hid the 
bright apple of her eye, that the pure light penetrated. 
She was between her younger and her eldest sister, as 
pudeur between naivete and grace, bearing a faint resem- 
blance to both. She looked at me twice, but spoke not; 
she was the only one of "the three whose voice I had not 
heard, and the only one whose name I knew. At one 
time her younger sister said to her " Look, Stella 1" I 
at no former period so well understood all that is limpid, 
luminous, and charming in that name. 

The youngest made these reflections in an audible 
voice : " Poor man ! they have cut his head off. It was 
then the time when they took off the heads of men!" 
Then she exclaimed " O ! here's the epitaph. It is 
Latin : 'Vox TACUIT PERUT LUX. It is difficult to read. 
I should like to know what it says." 

" Let us go for father," the eldest said ; " he will ex- 
plain it to us." Thereupon all three bounded away like 
fawns. They did not even deign to ask me ; and I was 
somewhat humbled on thinking that my English had 
given them a bad opinion of my Latin. I took a pencil, 
and wrote beneath the^ inscription the following transla- 
tion of the distich : 

Dans la nuit la voix se tue, 
L'ombre ^teignit le flambeau. 
Ce qui manque a la statue 
Manque a 1'homme en son tombeau. 

Just as I was finishing the last line I heard the young 
girls shouting " This way, father this way P I made 
my escape, however, before they appeared. Did they see 



160 GANTRAM AND LIB A. 

the explanation that I had left them ? I do not know. 
I hastened to a different part of the ruin, and saw them 
no more. Neither did I hear anything further of the 
mysterious decapitated chevalier. Sad destiny ! What 
crime had that miserable man committed ? Man had 
bereft him of life ; Providence had added to that forget- 
fulness. His statue was deprived of a head, his name is 
lost to legends, and his history is no longer in the me- 
mory of man ! His tombstone, also, will soon disappear. 
Some vine- dressers of Sonneck, or of Ruppertsberg, will 
take it, trample upon the mutilated skeleton that it per- 
haps still covers, break the stone in two, and make a 
seat of it, on which peasants will sit, old women knit, and 
children play. In our days, both in Germany and France, 
ruins are of utility ; with old palaces new huts are con- 
structed. 

But, my friend, allow me to return to Falkenburg. It 
is enough for me, in this nest of legends, to speak of this 
old tower, still erect and proud, though its interior be 
dilapidated. If you do not know Cie adventures that 
transpired here the legends that abound respecting this 
place a recital of a few of them may amuse you. One in 
particular, that of Gantram and Liba, starts fresh in my 
memory. It was upon this bridge that Gantram and Liba 
met two men carrying a coffin ; and on this stair that 
Liba threw herself into her lover's arms, saying smilingly, 
" A coffin ? No it is the nuptial bed that you have 
seen !" It was in this court, at present filled with hem- 
lock, in flower, that Gantram, when conducting his bride 
to the altar, saw to him alone visible a man clothed in 
black, and a woman, with a veil over her face, walking 



THE AUBEKGF.. 161 

before him. It was in this Roman chapel, now crum- 
bling, where living lizards creep upon those that are sculp- 
tured, that, when Gantram was putting the wedding-ring 
upon the taper finger of his bride, he suddenly felt the 
cold grasp of an unknown hand it was that of the maiden 
of the castle, who while she combed her hair, had sung, 
the night long, near an open and empty grave. 

I remained several hours in these ruins a thousand 
ideas crowded upon me. Spiritus loci ! My next letter 
may contain them. Hunger also came ; but 3 thanks to 
the French deer that a fair voyageuse whom I met spoke 
to me about, I was enabled to reach a village on the bor- 
ders of the Rhine, which is, I believe, called Trecktling- 
shausen the ancient Trajani Castrum. 

All that is here in the shape of an auberge is a taverne 
a biere ; and all that I found for dinner was a tough leg 
of mutton, which a student, who was smoking his pipe at 
the door, tried to dissuade me from eating, by saying that 
a hungry Englishman, who had been an hour before me, 
had tried to masticate it, but had left off in disgust. I did 
not reply haughtily, as Marshal de Crequi did before the 
fortress of Gayi " What Barberousse cannot take, Bar- 
begrise will take ;" but I ate of the leg of mutton. 

I set out as the sun was declining, and soon left the 
Gothic chapel of St. Clement behind me. My road lay 
along the base of several mountains, on the summits of 
which were situated three castles Reichenstein, Rhein- 
stein (both of which were demolished by Rodolph of 
Habsburgh, and rebuilt by the Count Palatine, and 
Vaugtsberg inhabited in 1348 by Kuno of Falkenstein, 
and repaired by Prince Frederick of Prussia.) My thoughts 



162 MAUSKTHUBM. 

turned upon a ruin that I knew lay between the place 
where I was and Bingen a strange unsightly ruin, 
which, near the conflux of the Nahue and the Rhine, 
stands erect in the middle of the river. 

I remember from childhood a picture that some German 
servant had hung above my bed : it represented an old, 
isolated, dilapidated tower, surrounded with water ; the 
heavens above it were dark, and covered with heavy clouds. 
In the evenings, after having offered up my prayers to 
God, and before reposing, I looked attentively at the pic- 
ture. In the dead of the night I saw it in my dreams, and 
then it was terrible. The tower became enormous, 
the lightning flashed from the clouds, the waters roared, 
the wind whistled among the mountains, and seemed 
every moment as if about to pluck them from their base. 
One day I asked the servant the name of the tower, and 
she replied, making the sign of the cross on her forehead 
" Mausethurm." Afterwards she told me the follow- 
ing story: 

At one time, there lived at Mayence a cruel arch- 
bishop named Hatto a miserly priest who, she said, 
was " readier to open his hand to bless than to bestow in 
charity. " That one bad harvest he purchased all the 
corn, in order to sell it again at a high price, for money 
was the sole desire of this wicked priest. That at length 
famine became so great that the peasants in the villages 
of the Rhine were dying of hunger that the people as- 
sembled in the town of Mayence, weeping and de- 
manding bread and that the archbishop refused to give 
them any. The starving people did not disperse, but 
surrounded the palace, uttering frightful groans. Hatto, 



HATTp AND THE BATS. 163 

annoyed by the cries of starvation, caused his archers to 
seize the men and women, old and young, and to shut 
them up in a granary, to which he set fire. " It was," 
added the old woman, ' * a spectacle that might have caused 
the stones to weep." Hatto did nothing but laugh , and, 
as the wretched sufferers screamed in agony, and were 
expiring in the flames, he exclaimed 
" Do you hear the squeaking of the rats !" 
The next day the fatal granary was in ashes, and there 
were no longer any inhabitants in Mayence. The town 
seemed dead and deserted ; when suddenly a swarm of 
rats sprang like the worms in the ulcers of Assuerus 
from the ashes of the granary, coming from under the 
ground, appearing in every crevice, swarming the streets, 
the citadel, the palace, the caves, the chambers, and the 
alcoves. It was a scourge, an affliction, a hideous four- 
millement. Hatto, in despair, quitted Mayence, and fled 
to the plains, but the rats followed him ; he shut him- 
self up in Bingen, which was surrounded with walls, but 
the rats gained access by creeping under them. Then 
the despairing bishop caused a tower to be erected in the 
middle of the Rhine, and took refuge in it ; the rats swam 
over, climbed up the tower, gnawed the doors and win- 
dows, the walls and ceilings, and, at last, reaching the 
palace, where the miserable archbishop was hid, devoured 
him. At present the malediction of Heaven and of man 
is upon this tower, which is called Mausethurm. It is 
deserted it is crumbling into ruins in the middle of the 
stream ; and sometimes at night a strange red vapour is 
seen issuing from it resembling the smoke of a furnace : 
it is the soul of Hatto, which hovers round the place. 



164 FICTION AND REALITY. 

There is one thing remarkable. History, occasionally, 
is immoral ; but legends are always moral, and tend to vir- 
tue. In history the powerful prosper, tyrants reign, the 
wicked conduct themselves with propriety, and monsters 
do well ; a Sylla is transformed into an honourable man ; 
a Louis the Eleventh and a Cromwell die in their beds. 
In tales hell is always visible. There is not a fault that 
has not its punishment not a crime which leads not to 
inquietude no wicked men but those who become 
wretched. Man, who is the inventor of fiction, feels that 
he has no right to make statements and leave to vague 
supposition their consequences ; for he is groping in dark- 
ness is sure of nothing : he requires instruction and coun- 
sel, and dares not relate events without drawing imme- 
diate conclusions. God, who is the originator of history, 
shows what he chooses, and knows the rest. 

Mausethurm is a convenient word, for we may find in it 
whatever we desire. There are individuals who believe 
themselves capable of judging of everything, and who 
are only wise in their own estimation ; who chase poesy 
from everything, and who say, as the man did to the 
nightingale " Stupid beast ! won't you cease to make 
that noise. " These people affirm that the word Mause- 
thurm is derived from maus, or mauth, which signifies 
"custom-house ;" that in the tenth century, before the bed 
of the river was enlarged, the Rhine had only one passage, 
and that the authorities of Bingen levied, by means of 
this tower, a duty upon all vessels that passed. For these 
grave thinkers these wiseacres the cursed tower was a 
douane, and Hatto was a custom-house officer. 



THE RAT TOWER. 165 

According to the old women, with whom I freely asso- 
ciated, Mausethurm is derived from mause, or mus, which 
signifies a rat. The pretended custom-house is the Rat 
Tower, and its toll-keeper a spectre. 

After all, these two opinions may be reconciled. It 
is not altogether improbable that, towards the sixteenth 
or seventeenth century, after Luther, after Erasmus, 
several burgomasters of nerve made use of the tower of 
Hatto for a custom-house. Why not ? Rome made a 
custom-house of the temple of Antonious, the dogana. 
What Rome did to history, Bingen might well do to 
legend. 

In that case Mauih might be right, and Mause net be 
wrong. 

Let that be as it may ; one thing is certain, that since 
the old servant told me the story of Hatto, Mausethurm 
has always been one of the familiar visions of my mind. 
You are aware that there are no men without their phan- 
toms, as there are none without their whims. 

Night is the time of dreams : at one time a ray of light 
appears, then a flame of fire ; and, according to the reflec- 
tion, the same dream may be a celestial glory, or an ap- 
parition of hell. 

I must admit that the Rat Tower, in the middle of its 
agitated waters, never appeared to me but with a horrible 
aspect. Also shall I avow it ? when chance, by whose 
fantasy I was led, brought me to the banks of the Rhine, 
the first thought that struck me was, not that I should 
see the dome of Mayence, or the cathedral of Cologne, 
or the Poalz, but that I should see the Rat Tower. 

Judge then of my feelings, poor believing poet and 



166 MAUSETHURM. 

infatuated antiquary that I am ! Twilight slowly suc- 
ceeded day ; the hills became sombre, the trees dark ; 
and a few stars twinkled in the heavens. I walked on 
my eyes fixed on obsc urity : I felt that I was approaching 
Mausethurm, and that in a few minutes that redoubtable 
ruin, which to me had, up to this day, been only a 
dream, was about to become a reality. 

I came to a turning in the road, and suddenly stopped. 
At my feet was the Rhine, running rapidly and mur- 
muring among the bushes ; to my right and left, moun- 
tains, or rather huge dark heaps, whose summits were 
lost in a sky in which a star was scarcely to be seen ; 
at the base, for the horizon, an immense curtain of dark- 
ness; in the middle of the flood, in the distance, stood a 
large black tower, of a strange form, from which a sin- 
gular red light issued, resembling the vapour of a furnace, 
casting a glare upon the surrounding mountains, showing 
a mournful-looking ruin on the left bank, and reflecting 
itself fantastically in the waters. There was no human 
voice to be heard; no, not even the chirping of a bird. 
All was solitude a fearful, and sad silence, troubled only 
by the monotonous murmurings of the Rhine. 

My eyes were fixed upon Mausethurm. I could not 
imagine it more frightful than it appeared. All was 
there night, clouds, mountains; the quivering of the 
reeds ; the noise of the flood full of secret horror, like 
the roaring of hydras under water ; the sad and faint 
blasts of wind; the shadows, abandonment isolation; 
all, even to the vapour of the furnace upon the tower- 
the soul ofHatto! 

An idea crossed my mind, perhaps the most simple, but 



MAUSETHURM. 167 

which at that moment produced a giddiness in my head. 
I wished at that hour, without waiting till next day, or 
till daylight, to go to the ruin. The apparition was be- 
fore my eyes, the night was dark, the phantom of the 
archbishop was upon the tower. It was the time to visit 
Mausethurm. 

But how could I do it ? where could 1 find a boat in 
such a place ? To swim across the Rhine would be to 
evince rather too great a taste for spectres. Moreover, had 
I imagined myself a good swimmer, and been fool enough 
for such an act, the redoubtable gulf of Bingerloch, 
which formerly swallowed up boats as sea-dogs swallow 
herrings, and which is at this identical spot, would have 
effectually deterred me. I was somewhat embarrassed. 

Continuing my way towards the ruin, I remembered 
that the tinkling of the silver bell and the spectres of the 
dungeon of Velmich did not prevent the peasants from 
propping the vine and exploring the ruins ; I concluded 
that near a gulf, where fish necessarily abound, I should 
probably meet with the cabin of some fisherman. When 
vine-dressers brave Falkenstein and his Mouse, fishermen 
might well dare Hatto and his rats. 

I was not deceived. I continued, however, walking 
for some time before I met anything; but at length 
reached a point of the bank where the Nahue joins the 
Rhine. I began to give up all hopes of meeting a wa- 
terman, but, on descending towards some osiers, I descried 
a boat of a strange construction, in which a man, enveloped 
in a covering, was sleeping. I went into the boat, awoke 
the man, and pointed to the tower; but he did not under- 
stand me. I then showed him one of the large Saxony 



168 BINGERLOCH. 

crowns, which are of the value of six francs each : he un- 
derstood me immediately; and a few minutes afterwards, 
without exchanging a word, we, spectre-like, were glid- 
ing towards Mausethurin. 

When in the middle of the flood, it seemed to me as if 
the tower diminished in size, instead of increasing. 

It was the Rhine which made it appear less. As I had 
taken the boat at a place which was higher up than 
Mausethurm, we descended the river, advancing rapidly. 
My eyes were fixed upon the tower, from the summit of 
which the vague light was still issuing, and which, at 
each stroke of the oar, I saw distinctly increasing. Sud- 
denly I felt the bark sinking under me, as if we were in a 
whirlpool, and the jerk caused my stick to roll at my feet. 
I looked at my companion, who, returning my gaze with a 
sinister smile, which, seen by the supernatural light 
of Mausethurm, had something frightful in it, said, 
" Bingerloch. " We were upon the gulf. The boat 
turned. The man rose, seized the anchor with one hand 
and a cord with the other, plunged the former into the 
surge, leaped on the gunnel, and began to walk upon it. 
This manoeuvre was accomplished with admirable dexte- 
rity and marvellous sang-froid. 

We landed. I raised my eyes. A short distance from 
where I stood, on a little island not observable from the 
land, was Mausethurm, an enormous, formidable castle, 
dilapidated and in fragments, as if gnawed by the fright- 
ful rats of the legend. 

The faint light that I observed was a red flame which 
shed rays along the mountains, giving to every crevice 
the appearance of the mouth of an enormous lantern. It 



HATTO'S TOWR. 169 

also seemed to me as if I heard in that fatal edifice a 
strange, continued noise a sort of gnawing sound. 

I looked at the waterman, told him to wait my return, 
and walked towards the ruin. 

It was truly the tower of Hatto the place of rats. 
Mausetburm was before my eyes, and I was about to 
enter. In directing my steps towards a low door in the 
facade, through which the wind from the river was whis- 
tling, I was startled by some black living creature, which 
ran rapidly by my feet. It appeared to me to be a huge 
rat running towards the reeds. On reaching the door I 
ventured to look into the room, from which the strange 
gnawing sound and the extraordinary glare of light still 
came; I will tell you what I saw : 

In an angle, opposite the door were two men with 
their backs turned to me. One was in a stooping pos- 
ture, and the other seated upon a kind of iron vice, which 
a person of discernment might have taken for an instru- 
ment of torture. Their feet and arms were naked, 
their clothes tattered, and each wore a leathern apron. 
One was old his grey hair testified it ; the other was 
young I saw his fair locks, which, from the reflection 
of a large lighted furnace in the opposite angle, appeared 
red. The old man wore, like the Guelphs, his cowl in- 
clined to the right : and the young one, like the Gibelins, 
had his upon the left side. But they were neither Gibelins 
nor Guelphs, demons nor spectres. Two blacksmiths 
were before me. The light the soul of Hatto changed 
by hell into a living flame was the fire and smoke of the 
chimney ; the gnawing sound, the noise of files. 

The two blacksmiths were worthy individuals. They 

tt 



170 THE KLOPP. 

showed me the ruins ; pointed out the place in which 
Hatto had taken shelter ; and then lent me a lantern, with 
which I ranged through the whole of the little island. 

After having examined the ruin I left Mausethurm. 
My waterman was fast asleep, but was no sooner roused 
than we proceeded forthwith to cross the Rhine, when 
I again heard the noise of the worthy blacksmiths: 

Half an hour afterwards I arrived at Bingen; was 
very hungry ; supped : after which, although fatigued^ 
although the inhabitants were asleep in their beds, I ex- 
plored the Klopp, an old castle in ruins, which overlooks 
Bingen, where I witnessed a spectacle worthy of closing 
a day on which I saw so many things, with so many ideas 
crossing my mind. 



LETTER XXL 

LEGEND OF THE HANDSOME PECOPIN AND THE BEAU- 
TIFUL BAULDOUR. 

The planet Venus and the bird Phoenix. The difference between the 
ear of a young man and that of an old one. The qualities essential 
to different embassies. Happy effect of a good thought. The Devil 
is wrong in being a gourmand. Amiable proposition of an old sage. 
The wandering Christian. The danger to which we expose our- 
selves by getting on a strange horse, The return. Bauldour. 

PROMISED to relate one of the legends 
of Falkenburg, perhaps the most interest- 
ing, that of the grave adventure of 
Guntram and Liba ; but, after reflection, 
I think it would be useless to do so, as 
you will find it in almost any collection, written in a 
spirit far more enlivening than I could tell it. However, 
since you absolutely wish a story for your children, I will 
write you one, which you will find nowhere else. You 
may thank the old French soldier for it. This follower 
of the republican army believes, at present, in gnomes and 
fairies, as devoutly as he formerly credited the puissance 
of the emperor. Solitude has always this effect upon the 

Q2 




172 PECOPIN 

mind ; it develops the poetry which is inherent in man, 
and makes him a believer in the wonderful and super- 
natural. 

LEGEND OP THE HANDSOME PECOPIN AND THE 
BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 

THE handsome Pecopin loved the beautiful Bauldour, and 
the lovely Bauldour was enamoured of the gay Pecopin. 
He possessed all the qualities of a lord and of a man ; 
and she was a queen when at home, a Itoly virgin at 
church, a nymph in the woods, and a fairy at work. 

Pecopin was an excellent hunter, and Bauldour was a 
good spinster. When he was absent, the distaff amused 
and consoled her; and when the sound of the horn, 
mingling with the noise of the hounds, would strike her 
ear, she fancied she could distinguish the words " Think 
of thy lover.'* Besides, the wheel, which caused the 
belle reveuse to stoop, was ever saying, in a soft and small 
voice Think of him." 

When the husband and lover are united in one person, 
all goes well. Marry, then, the spinster to the hunter, 
and fear nothing. 

However, I must say that Pecopin was too fond of 
hunting. When he was on horseback, the falcon resting 
on his hand, or when he was following the stag, he for- 
got everything. Whoever loves horses and dogs too much, 
displeases woman ; and he who loves woman too much, 
displeases God. Govern, therefore, your tastes, and 
bridle your inclinations. 

When Bauldour, that noble and lovely young girl, that 
star of love, of youth, and of beauty, saw Pecopin caress- 
ing his dog, a huge animal, with large nostrils, long ears, 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 173 

and a black mouth, she was jealous of it. She entered 
her room disconcerted and sad, and there wept. Then 
she scolded her servants, and after them her dwarf. Wo- 
man's anger is like rain in a forest it falls twice. Bis 
pluit. 

In the evening, Pecopin blackened with powder and 
weary with fatigue, returned to Bauldour, who pouted 
and murmured, with a tear in the corner of her large 
blue eye. Pecopin pressed her little hand, and she 
ceased murmuring ; then he kissed her rosy lips, and she 
smiled. She never suffered the chevalier to take her by 
the waist. One evening he slightly pressed her elbow, 
and her face coloured up with blushes and offended pride. 
She was betrothed, but not married. Modesty in woman 
is what bravery is in man. 

PART II. 

THE BIRD PHCENIX AND VENUS. Pecopin had in his 
hall at Sonneck, a large gilt painting, which represented 
the nine heavens, each with its appropriate colour and 
name affixed to it : Saturn, leaden colour ; Jupiter, 
clear and brilliant ; Venus, the east on fire ; Mercury, 
sparkling ; the Moon, with its silvery appearance ; the 
Sun, shining flames. Pecopin erased the word Venus, 
and substituted Bauldour. 

The fair demoiselle had in her room large tapestries, 
on which was an immense bird, the size of an eagle, 
with a golden neck and a blue tail. Above this mar- 
vellous animal was written the Greek word ** Phoenix." 
Bauldour effaced it, and substituted "Pecopin." 

The day fixed for the nuptials drew near : Pecopin 
was full of joy, and Bauldour was happy. 

Q3 



174 PECOPIN 

A week before the appointed day of marriage, Bauldour 
was busily spinning at her window. Her dwarf came 
to tell her that Pecopin was coming upstairs, at which 
intelligence she rose hurriedly to run to her betrothed ; 
but her foot got entangled with the thread, and she fell. 
Poor Bauldour rose ; she was not hurt ; but, remem- 
bering that a similar accident happened at the castle to 
Liba, she felt sad at heart. Pecopin entered, beaming 
with joy, spoke of their marriage and of their happiness, 
and the cloud that hovered round her soul vanished. 

PART III. 

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE EAR OF A YOUNG 
MAN AND THAT OF AN OLD ONE. Next day Bauldour was 
spinning in her chamber, and Pecopin was hunting in 
the woods. He had no companion but his dog. In fol- 
lowing the chase, he came to the forest of Sonn, where 
there are four large trees an ash, an elm, a fir,and an 
oak which are called by the people " The Evangelists" 
As Pecopin passed under the shade, four birds were 
perched upon the trees a daw upon the ash, a black- 
bird upon the elm, a magpie upon the fir, and a crow 
upon the oak. These feathered creatures made a strange 
confused noise, and seemed as if they were interrogating 
each other. A few steps further on an old man was 
seated on the stump of a tree ; and as Pecopin passed he 
turned round and said 

" Sire chevalier, do you know what the birds are 
saying?" 

" My good fellow," Pecopin replied, "what does it 
matter to me?" 

" Sir," said the peasant, " for the young the blackbird 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 1?5 

whistles, the magpie chatters, and the raven croaks ; for 
the old the birds speak." 

The chevalier burst out into a fit of laughter, saying, 
"Pardieu! you're raving." 

"You are wrong, Sir Pecopin," the old man said 
with gravity. 

" You never saw me before ; how is it that you know 
my name ?" 

" From the birds,*' replied the peasant. 

" You are an old fool, my worthy fellow," Pecopin 
said, continuing his route. 

About an hour afterwards Pecopin heard the sound of 
a horn, and then perceived the Count Palatine and his 
suite, who were out on a hunting excursion. 

" Holla ! " one of them cried out, on seeing Pecopin, 
" my brave hunter won't you accompany us ?" Pecopin 
consented, and conducted himself so marvellously, by 
killing the different animals they pursued, that the count 
gave him a fief of Rhineck, enrolled him amongst his 
followers, and prevailed upon him to go to Stahleck, to 
take the oath of allegiance. Pecopin sent a message to 
Bauldour, announcing the intention of the pfalzgraf, 
"Be not uneasy, my beloved," he added; "I will be 
with you next month." The messenger set out, and 
Pecopin retired with the prince and his followers to the 
castle at Bacharach. 

PART IV. 

QUALITIES ESSENTIAL TO DIFFERENT EMBASSIES. 
Pecopin was a nobleman by blood, by nature, and by 
outward appearance, and pleased the pfalzgraf so much, 
that this prince one day said to him, " My friend, I have 



176 PKCOPIN AND THE 

an embassy for my cousin of Bourgogne, and your noble 
appearance and gallant behaviour have induced me to 
make you my ambassador.'' 

Pecopin obeyed the wishes of his prince, and went to 
Dijon, where the duke received him kindly ; and he was 
soon after, on account of his rank, sent on an embassy to 
the King of France. One day the king said, " Pecopin, 
I require a gentleman to go to Spain on urgent business ; 
but, finding none of my followers capable of undertaking 
such a task, I have fixed upon you, on account of your 
mien and mind. Pecopin again set out ; and when the 
negotiation was terminated, he went to the sultan to 
take his leave. 

" I receive your adieus with pleasure, for you must set 
out immediately for Bagdad." 

" For Bagdad !" Pecopin replied with astonishment ' 
" Yes, chevalier," replied the Moorish prince, " for I 
cannot sign the treaty with the King of France without 
the consent of the Caliph of Bagdad." 

Pecopin went to Bagdad, where a strange adventure 
happened to him. One day, while passing the walls of 
the seraglio, the sultan's favourite perceived him; and as 
he was handsome, bold, and of a haughty air, she con- 
ceived a passion for Pecopin, and sent a black slave to 
speak to him : 

"This talisman," she said, " is the gift of a princes* 
who loves you, but who will never see you more. Take 
care of it ; for as long as you wear it you will never be 
old ; when you are in danger, touch it, and you will be 
saved." Pecopin accepted the talisman, and attached it 
to his neck-chain. ' Now," the slave added, " do not lose 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 177 

it ; for whilst you have it in your possession, you will 
always have the same youthful appearance ; but when you 
lose it, the infirmities of every year which has passed over 
your head will instantaneously attack you. Adieu, hand- 
some giaour." Having said this, the negress left him. 

The caliph had observed his favourite's slave speaking 
with Pecopin, and was fired with jealousy. He invited 
the stranger to a feast, and at night conducted him to the 
summit of a high tower. Pecopin without suspicion, ad- 
vanced near the parapet, which was very low, when the 
caliph addressed him in these words ; 

" Chevalier the Count Palatine sent you to the Duke 
of Bourgogne on account of your renown ; the Duke 
of Bourgogne sent you to the King of France because you 
were of a noble race ; the King of France sent you to the 
Sovereign of Grenada on account of your wit ; and he 
sent you to the Caliph of Bagdad because you were 
noble in appearance. As for me, on account of thy fame, 
thy rank, thy wit, and thy fine appearance, I send thee to 
the devil.'' 

On pronouncing the last word, the caliph pushed Pe- 
copin over the parapet. 

PART IV. 

GOOD EFFECTS OF A GOOD THOUGHT. When a man 
falls from a height, terrible ideas flash across his brain- 
life, which he is going to leave; and the regions of death, 
which he is about to enter. In that awful moment Pe- 
copin thought of Bauldour put his hand to his heart, 
and, without knowing, touched the talisman. No sooner 
had his finger come in contact with the magic stone, than 
he felt as if he were supported with wings. He no longer 



178 PECOPIN AND 

fell he flew, and continued to do so all night. Just as 
day was breaking, the invisible hand that supported him 
placed him gently upon the sea-shore. 

PART V. 
THE DEVIL 19 WRONG IN BEING A GOURMAND. 

At this time a singular and disagreeable adventure 
happened to the devil. It was customary for Asmodeus 
to go about picking up all the souls that belonged to him, 
putting them into a bag and carrying them away upon 
his back. One day, being more fortunate than usual, he 
was filling his sack gaily, when, turning round, he beheld 
an angel, who was smiling at him. The devil shook up 
the bag, and continued filling for some time. At last he 
stopped, and seized hold of it to swing it over his shoulder ; 
but the Eouls that he had crammed into it were so nume- 
rous, and the iniquities with which they were burthened 
weighed so heavily, that he could not move it. He took 
both his hands, and made a second attempt, which proved 
asfutileas the first, "Osouls of lead !" the devil exclaimed, 
and then he began swearing. Again he looked up, and 
he saw the angel laughing at him, 

" What are you doing there ?" cried the demon. 

, 'You see well enough : I was smiling a short time ago ; 
now I am laughing.'* 

" O celestial fowl ! huge innocent ! begone !" Asmo- 
deus cried. 

The angel looked at him with gravity, and said 
* " Hear me, dragon : you will not be able to carry 
away that load of souls till a saint from paradise or a 
Christian from heaven falls upon the earth and helps 
thee to put it on thy shoulders." That said, the angel 
opened his wings and flew away. 



THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUU. 179 

The devil was very much disconcerted. " What does 
that imbecile mean?" he muttered between his teeth. 
" A saint from paradise, or a Christian from heaven ! I 
shall be forced to remain a long time if I wait the coming 
of such assistance. How, in the name of all the saints, 
did I so cram my sack ?" 

As the devil stood by the side of his heavy burden, 
heaping imprecations upon himself for his own stupidity, 
he cast his eyes upwards, and perceived a black speck in 
the heavens, which every moment became larger and 
larger. The devil put his hands on his knees to take a 
better view of it, and discovered that it was a man an 
armed Christian, bearing a. cross upon his breast, falfing 
from the clouds. 

" What is it to me who sends him ?" exclaimed the 
devil, jumping with joy : " I am saved ! I could not get 
over four saints a short time ago, who laughed at the 
pitiful tale that I told them ; but it will be easy for me 
to manage this fellow." 

Pecopin, on finding himself on terra firma, looked 
round, and, on perceiving the old man, who was like a 
slave resting by the side of his load, he accosted him 
thus : " Who are you, friend ? and, pray, where am I ?" 

The devil whined out piteously 

" You, sir, are on the borders of the Red Sea, and I 
am the most wretched of all miserable beings. I have a 
very cruel master, who has taken it into his head to build a 
mountain, and he obliges me, an old man, to carry loads 
of sand from the borders of the sea. I begin at the break 
of day, and never leave off before sunset. Yesterday I 
was returning with my sixth load, when fatigue overcame 



180 PECOFIN 

me : I thought I would rest myself, and afterwards found 
that I had not strength to lift the load on my shoulders, 
and therefore was obliged to remain here all night, look- 
ing at my burden, and cursing my master for his cruelty. 
My good sir, for pity's sake, help me up with this load, 
that I may return to my master. I am sure he will 
kill me." 

Pecopin shook his head, saying, " Good man, your 
story is an unlikely one." 

" My dear sir," the devil replied, "what has happened 
to you, if told, would be as unlikely ; yet it is true. Then, 
he continued, "what harm would it do to you to help 
an iafirm old man to place his load upon his back ?" 

This was a just demand. Pecopin stooped, seized the 
bag, and was placing it on the back of the old man, who 
was leaning forward to receive the load. The devil is 
vicious it was for vice that he fell ; he is greedy, which 
passion causes often the loss of all. The idea struck him 
of adding the soul of Pecopin to the others ; but first of 
all he must kill Pecopin. 

The devil began to speak to some invisible spirit, in a 
kind of jargon, half Italian, half Spanish, which Pecopin 
fortunately understood : - 

" Bamus, non. ciera'occhi, verbera, frappa, y echo, la 



Suspicion flashed like lightning across the mind of 
Pecopin : he raised his eyes, and saw above his head an 
enormous stone that some invisible hand held suspended 
in the air. 

He stepped backwards, touched his talisman with his 
left hand, seized his poniard with his right, and plunged 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 181 

it with violence into the bag. The devil cried hideously, 
and the souls, profiting by the hole which Pecopin had 
made, flew away, leaving behind them their dark deeds 
and crimes, which, by their natural attraction to the 
demon, fixed upon his back : thus it is that the devil is 
always represented with a hump. 

At the moment that Pecopin stepped backwards the 
invisible giant dropped the stone, which fell upon the 
foot of the devil, and crushed it ; and from that day 
Asmodeus has always been club-footed. 

The devil, like Jove, has thunder at his command, but 
it is of a more frightful nature, coming from the earth 
and uprooting trees. Pecopin felt the ground tremble 
beneath him ; a dense cloud rose around, and a noise 
met his ear : it appeared to him that he fell, and rolled 
along the ground like a withered leaf when blown by the 
wind. He fainted. 

PART VII. 

AMIABLE PROPOSITIONS OF AN OLD SAGE. When 
Pecopin recovered, he heard a soft voice saying, " Phi 
sma, " which is Arabian, and signifies " He is in heaven." 
Another person placed his hand on his chest, and replied, 
*'Zo, lo, machi mouth," which means, "No, no, he is not 
dead." Pecopin- opened his eyes, and saw an old man 
and a young girl kneeling by his side : the countenance 
of the former was as dark as night ; h e had a long whit 
beard, and was enveloped in a scarf of green silk. The 
young girl was of a copper colour, had large hazel eyes, 
lips of coral, and gold rings hanging from her nose and 
ears. She was exceedingly handsome. 

Pecopin was no longer by the sea-side. The blast of 

R 



182 PECOPIN 

hell had borne him into a valley filled with rocks and 
trees of a strange form. He rose. The old man and the 
handsome female looked at him affectionately. He ap- 
proached one of the trees, the leaves contracted, the 
branches receded, and the flowers, which were pale 
white, became red. Pecopin recognised the mimosa or 
"tree of shame," and concluded that he had left India, 
and was now in the famed country of Pudiferan. 

The old man beckoned to Pecopin to follow, and in a 
few minutes all three were seated upon a mat in a cabin 
built of palm-leaves, the interior of which was filled 
with precious stones, that shone like a heated furnace. 
The old man looked at Pecopin, and said in German, 
" My son, I am the man who knows everything, the 
great Ethiopian lapidary, the taleb of the Arabs. I am 
the first that ever penetrated this desert ; thou art the 
second. I have passed my life in gleaning from nature 
the science of things, and filling them with the science of 
the soul. Thanks to me and to my lessons ; thanks to 
the rays which, in this valley of animate stone, of think- 
ing plants, and of wise animals, have fallen for a hundred 
years from my eyeballs! Jt was I who pointed out to 
beasts their true medicine, of which man stands so much 
in need. Till now I have only had beasts for disciples, 
but have long wished for a man. Thou art come ; then 
be my son. I am old. I will leave thee my cabin, my 
precious stones, my valley, and my science. Thou shalt 
marry my daughter, who is called Aissab, and who is 
good and beautiful. We shall pass our days happily, in 
picking up diamonds and eating the roots of plants. Be 
my son." 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 183 

** Thanks, my venerable seignor," Pecopin said; "I 
accept with joy your kind offer." 

When night came, he made his escape. 

PART VIII. 

THE WANDERING CHRISTIAN. To tell all the adven- 
tures of Pecopin would be to relate the voyage of the 
world. At one time he was walking with naked feet on 
the sea-shore, at another, in sandals climbing up a moun- 
tain ; now riding upon an ass, afterwards seated on a 
zebra or an elephant. He lost in the desert, like Jerome 
Costilla, four of his toes ; and, like Mendez Pinto, was 
sold twenty times. He clambered up mountains whose 
summits were hidden in the clouds, and on approaching 
their tops, vomited blood and phlegm. He came to that 
island which no one when seeking can find, and to which 
chance only can bring one. In Scythia he killed a 
griffin which the people had long been endeavouring 
to destroy in order to possess the gold guarded by that 
animal ; for which act they wished to make him their king, 
but he declined their offer. Amidst all his adventures, 
all his daring deeds, his miseries, and troubles, the brave 
and faithful Pecopin had only one end in view to find 
Germany to enter Falkenburg with the hope of seeing 
Bauldour. 

He counted with a sad heart the days as they passed, 
and, on reaching the north of France, found that five years 
had elapsed since he had seen Bauldour. He sat down 
upon a stone by the road- side ; his thoughts wandered 
to his beloved ; something fell upon his hand ; he started 
it was a tear that had dropped from his cheek. 

"Five years/' bethought, "is a longtime; but I will 

R-2 



184 PECOPIN 

see her now." Then, though his feet were lacerated with 
the stones, and his clothes torn, he proceeded with a light 
heart on his journey. 

After travelling all day among rocks, trying to discover 
a passage which descended to the Rhine, he arrived at a 
wood, which, without hesitation, he entered ; and after 
walking for upwards of an hour, found himself near a 
ditch. Tired, and dying of hunger and thirst, he sank 
down upon the grass, lifted his eyes upwards, and per- 
ceived a flock of sheldrakes soaring above him. In agony 
of soul, he was asking himself where he was, when the 
sound of some one singing in the distance floated on the 
evening breeze- Pecopin raised himself on his elbow, 
listened attentively, and distinguished these words: 

Mon petit lac engendre, en 1'orabre qui Pabrite, 
La riante Amphitrite et le noir Neptunus ; 
Mon humble etang nourrit, sur des monts inconnus, 
L'empereur Neptunus et la reine Amphitrite, 
Je suis le nain, grand-pere des geants. 
Ma goutte d'eau produit deux oceans. 
Je verse de mes rocs, que n'effleure aucun aile, 
Un flueve bleu pour elle, un fleuve vert pour lui, 
J'^panche de ma grotte, 011 jamais feu n'a lui, 
Le fleuve vert pour lui, le fleuve bleu pour elle. 
Je suis le nain, grand-pre des grants. 
Ma goutte d'eau produit deux oceans. 
Une fine emeraude est dans mon sable jaune. 
Un pur saphir se cache en mon humide ecrin. 
Mon emeraude fond et devient le beau Rhin ; 
Mon saphir se dissout, ruisseUe et fait le Rhone. 
Je suis le nain, grand-pere des grants. 
Ma goutte d'eau produit deux oceans. 

Pecopin could no longer doubt the sad conviction that 
crossed his mind. Poor hungry and fatigued traveller ! 
he was in the fatal Wood of the Lost Path, which is full of 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 185 

labyrinths, and where the dwarf Roulon is ever seen 
deceiving the traveller, who, if once within the wood, is 
never known to leave it. 

The voice was that of Roulon ; the song was that of the 
wicked dwarf of the Bois des Pas Perdus. 

Pecopin, in despair, threw himself on the ground, cry. 
ing "Alas! all is over. I shall never more behold 
Bauldour." 

"You are wrong, if you serve me," said some one from 
behind. 

Pecopin looked up, and beheld an old gentleman 
equipped for the chase. It was not the dwarf Roulon, 
which circumstance made his heart leap with joy. 

"What do you want with me?" Pecopin demanded. 

" To take thee to Bauldour," replied the old man 
smiling. 

" When ? " 

"After you have spent a night in the chase." 

" But I am dying with hunger," Pecopin replied. " I 
am not able to get on horseback." 

The old gentleman took a bottle from his pocket, and 
presented it to Pecopin, who no sooner swallowed two or 
three mouthfuls than he felt invigorated, and cried 

" To the chase with all my heart. But shall I really 
see Bauldour to-morrow?" 

" Before the sun rises you shall be at the gates of 
Falkenburg." 

" Hollo, gentlemen ! hollo !" the old man cried, " To 
the chase !" 

On turning round, Pecopin perceived that his compa- 



3 



186 PECOPIN 

nion was humpbacked ; and when he walked, he disco- 
vered that he was club-footed 

At the call of the old man a host of gentlemen, 
clothed like princes, and mounted like kings, came 
from a thicket, and ranged themselves round him. 
He seemed to be their master. All were armed with 
knives and spears, the old man alone having a horn. 
The night was dark ; but suddenly two hundred servants 
appeared carrying torches. 

" Ebbene," said the master, " ubi sunt losperros?" 

This mixture of Italian, Latin, and Spanish was not at 
all agreeable to Pecopin. 

The old man then said with impatience 

" The dogs ! the dogs !" and in less than a minute a 
pack came howling and barking to the spot. 

Pecopin thought there was something extraordinary in 
all that he saw, and was beginning to consider whether 
he should follow in the chase, when the old man addressed 
him 

" Well, chevalier, what do you think of our dogs ?" 

" My good sir," Pecopin replied, " to follow such ani- 
mals we must have wonderful horses." 

The old man, without replying, raised the horn to his 
mouth, and blew it ; a noise was heard among the trees, 
and two magnificent horses, black as jet, appeared. 

"Well, seigneur," said the old man, smiling, "which 
of the two do you prefer ?" 

Pecopin did not reply, but leaped upon one of them. 
The old man asked him if he was well saddled ; and, on 
being answered in the affirmative, he burst into a fit of 
laughter, jumped like a tiger upon the other, which trem- 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 187 

bled fearfully, and began to blow the horn so violently, 
that Pecopin, deafened with the noise, believed that this 
singular individual had thunder in his chest. 

PART IX. 

THE DANGER TO WHICH WE EXPOSE OURSELVES BY 
GETTING ON A HORSE THAT WB DO NOT KNOW. At 

the sound of the horn a thousand strange lights started up 
in the forest ; strange shadows were seen everywhere ; and 
the words " To the chase," were heard mingling with the 
barking of the dogs, the neighing of horses, and the shak- 
ing of the trees. Pecopin's horse, accompanied by that 
of the old .man, started off at a violent gallop, making 
every step resound in the lover's brain, as if the horse's 
hoofs had come in contact with his skull. It was a gallop, 
rapid, supernatural, which almost deprived him of reason, 
for he was only sensible to the frightful noise around 
the whistling of the wind, the rustling of leaves, the 
barking and howling of dogs, and the neighing of horses. 
Suddenly all was silent, save the sound of the old 
man's horn in the distance. Pecopin knew not where 
he was. He looked round, and perceived his reflection 
in what he thought was the White Lake, then in the 
Black one ; but he saw it as the swallows see their sha- 
dows when gliding over the surface of a pond. In the 
midst of this strange course he raised his hand to his ta- 
lisman, and suddenly he was enveloped in darkness, 
while his horse began to gallop with renewed fury. At 
this terrible moment Pecopin commended his soul to God, 
and his heart to his mistress. He continued for some 
time thus, flying, as it were, through the air, when the 
thought struck him that death was preferable to such 



188 PFCOPIN 

torment. He tried to throw himself from his horse, but 
he discovered that some iron hand held him by the feet. 

The distant cries, the barking of dogs, the neighing (5f 
horses, mingling with the blasts of the old man's horn, 
again resounded frightfully in his ears. The poor chevalier 
closed his eyes and resigned himself to his fate. When 
he opened them, the heat of a tropical night struck his 
countenance ; the roarings of tigers and lions reached his 
ear ; and he saw huge ruins and strange trees. Pecopin 
was in an Indian forest he again shut his eyes. 

Suddenly his horse stopped, the noise ceased, and all 
was quiet. 

Pecopin, who had remained for some time with his eyes 
shut, opened them, and found himself before the fa9ade, 
of a sombre and colossal edifice. 

The old man's horn resounded through the building, 
the doors of the castle opened violently, as if by a blast 
of wind, and Pecopin, on his horse, entered a magnificent 
room, splendidly lighted. He cast his eyes towards the 
extremity of the hall, and saw a number of guests of 
strange appearance seated at table. No one spoke ; no 
one ate ; nor did any of them look at him. There was 
an empty seat at the head of the table, which indicated 
that they were waiting their superior's arrival. 

Pecopin discovered among this motley group the giant 
Nimrod; King Mithrobusane ; the tyrant Machanidas ; 
the Roman Consul, ^Emilius Barbula the second ; Hollo 
King of the sea ; Zuentibold, the unworthy son of the 
great Arnolphe King of Lorraine ; Athelstan King of 
England ; Aigrold King of Denmark. By the side of 
Nimrod, Cyrus, the founder of the Persian empire, was 
seated, leaning on his elbow. 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 189 

The old man's horn was again heard ; a large door, oppo 
site the one by which Pecopin had entered, opened, and 
innumerable valets appeared, carrying an immense golden 
plate, in the middle of which was a stag with sixteen 
horns, roasted and smoking. The old man entered and 
took his seat ; and, after observing the grave looks of his 
guests, burst into a fit of laughter, saying 

" Hombre? y mugeres, or qa vosotros belle signore do- 
mini et domince, amigos mios, comment va la besogne" 

11 You come very late," said one of the guests. 

" That is because I have a friend that is fond of hunt- 
ing ; I wished to show him one of our excursions." 

" Yes ; but look," Nimrod said, pointing to a little 
crevice which exposed the break of day. 

"Well, we must make haste," the old man said, 
making a sign to the valets to approach and deposit their 
load upon the table. Pecopin at this moment drew his 
sword, sank his spurs into the sides of his horse, which 
moved forward, and said with a loud voice 

"Pardieu! whoever ye maybe spectres, demons, or 
emperors I forbid you to move ; or, by all that is holy, 
ye shall feel, as well as that old man, the weight o*f a living 
cavalier's sword upon the heads of phantoms. I am in the 
cave of shadows ; but I shall do things real and terrible. 
Thou hast lied, miserable old man. Defend thyself; or, 
by the mass, I will cleave thy head, wert theu King Pluto 
in person." 

" What's the matter, my dear sir ?" the old man replied 
smiling. " You are going to sup with us." 

The grimace which accompanied this gracious invitation 
exasperated Pecopin, who cried 



190 PECOPIN 

" Defend yourself, old villain ! You made me a pro- 
mise, and you shall pay dearly for breaking it.*' 

" Ho, ho, my worthy friend! I have not done so ; you 
must wait a little." 

1 1 Thou promisedst to take me to Bauldour; thou 
knowest that she is my betrothed." 

" Well, since you will have it, be it so. Bad examples 
are shown by males and females above to those below. 
The sun and moon are wedded, but they are a discon- 
solate couple, for they are never together." 

"A truce to raillery I" Pecopin cried, bursting with 
rage, " or I will exterminate thee and thy demons, and 
purge thy cavern,," 

The old man replied, laughing, " Purge, my friend. 
Here is the prescription senna, rhubarb, and Epsom 
salts." 

Pecopin in fury levelled a blow at the old man's head, 
but his horse drew back, trembling. At this moment a 
gleam of light stole through a crevice, the cock crowed, 
and all disappeared. Pecopin, on his horse gliding from 
beneath him, found himself standing, sword in hand, in 
a ravine, near an old castle. Day broke ; he lifted his 
eyes, and leaped with joy. It was the castle of Falken- 
burg. He sheathed his sword, and was beginning to 
walk cheerfully towards the manor, when he heard some 
one say, 

" Well, Chevalier de Sonneck, have I kept my word ?" 

Pecopin turned round, and saw the little hunchback 
that he had met in the wood, who in irony asked him if 
he knew him. Pecopin said that he did, and thanked 
him for thus bringing him to his Bauldour. 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 191 

" Wait a little," the old man said. " You were in too 
great a hurry in accusing me ; you are in too great a 
hurry in returning me thanks. Listen. You are my 
creditor ; I owe thee two things the hump on my back 
and my club-foot ; but I am a good debtor. I found out 
thy inclinations, and I thought it would be a pity to 
debar such a good hunter as thou art from partaking in 
the night chase." 

Pecopin involuntarily shuddered, and the devil added, 
" If thou hadst not had thy talisman, I would have 
taken charge of thee ; but I am as well pleased that things 
have turned out as they have done.'' 

" Tell me, demon," Pecopin said; " is Bauldour dead, 
or married, or has she taken the veil ?*' 

" No ;" the demon replied, with a sinister grin. 
" She is at Falkenburg, and still loves me ?" 
" Yes, always." 

" In that case," Pecopin said, respiring as if a load had 
been taken from his chest, " whoever thou art, and what- 
ever may happen, I thank thee." 

" Dost thou ?" the devil replied. " Then, if thou art 
satisfied, so am I." On saying these words he disap- 
peared. 

Pecopin shrugged his shoulders, and said to himself 
smilingly, 

"Bauldour lives; she is free, and still loves me. 
What have I to fear ? When I met the demon yesterday 
evening, five years had expired since I left her, and it is 
now only a day more. 

" He approached the castle, recognised with joy each 
projection of the bridge, and felt happy. The thresh- 



192 PECOPIN 

old of the house in which our boyish days have been 
spent, like the countenance of an affectionate mother, 
smiles upon us, when returning after a few years' absence, 
with all the vigour of manhood. 

As he was crossing the bridge he observed a beautiful 
oak, whose top overlooked the parapet. "That is 
strange," he said to himself; "there was no tree there." 
Then he remembered that, two or three weeks before 
he left, Bauldour and he had amused themselves by 
throwing acorns at each other, and that at this spot one 
had fallen into the ditch. 

"The devil !" he exclaimed ; " an acorn become a tall 
oak in five years ! this is certainly a fertile soil ! " 

Four birds were perched upon this tree, trying which 
could make the most noise. Pecopin looked up, and 
saw a daw, a blackbird, a magpie, and a crow ; he hur- 
ried on his thoughts were on Bauldour. 

He arrived at the staircase, and was ascending quickly, 
when he heard some one laughing behind him, but on 
turning round could see nothing. He reached the door, 
in which was the key : his heart beat violently ; he 
listened, and the sound of a wheel struck his ear. Was 
it that of Bauldour ? Pecopin, trembling, turned the key, 
opened the door, entered, and beheld an old woman, 
decrepit and worn down by age, her face covered with 
a thousand wrinkles, long grey hair, escaping here and 
there from her cap, her eyebrows white, and gums 
toothless. This venerable yet frightful object was seated 
near the window, her eyes fixed upon the wheel at \vhich 
she was spinning, with the thread betwixt her long thin 
fingers. 



AND THE BEAUTIFUL BAULDOUR. 193 

The old lady was apparently very deaf, for, notwith- 
standing the noise that Pecopin made in entering, she 
did not move. Nevertheless, the chevalier took off his 
hat, as it becomes a man before a person of advanced age, 
and, going near her, said 

" Madame, where is Bauldour ?" 
The old dame lifted her eyes, and fixed them on Peco- 
pin ; the thread dropped from her trembling hand ; she 
screamed, and said with a feeble voice 

" Oh Heaven ! Pecopin ? What would you ? Masses 
for your troubled soul ? or why is it that, being so long 
dead, your shadow still walks abroad ?'' 

" Pardieu ! my good lady," Pecopin replied, laughing 
and speaking very loud, so that, if Bauldour was in 
the next room, she might hear him ; " Pardieu ! I am not 
dead ! It is not my ghost which stands before you. I 
am of good solid flh and bone, and have come back, 
not to have masses said for my soul, but for a kiss from 
my betrothed, whom I love more than ever." 

As he finished the last word, the old lady threw her- 
self into his arms. It was Bauldour ! The night-chase 
with the devil had lasted a hundred years ! 

Pecopin, distracted, left the apartment, ran down 
stairs, crossed the court, flew to the mountain, and took 
refuge in the forest of Sonneck. Like a madman, he 
wandered about the woods ail day : and when evening 
came, seeing that he was approaching the turrets of his 
own castle, he tore off the rich clothes which the devil 
had given him, and threw them into the torrent of Son- 
neck. Suddenly, his knees trembled, his hands shook, 
and, to prevent himself from falling, he leant against a 



194 PECOPJN AND BAULDOUR. 

tree. In Pecopin's excess of grief, he had unconsci- 
ously seized the talisman, and thrown it, with his clothes, 
into the torrent. The words of the Sultana's slave 
proved true. In one minute Pecopin had all the infirmi- 
ties attendant upon extreme old age. At that moment, 
he heard a burst of laughter ; he looked round, but 
could see no one. 

Pecopin, in pain and dejection, supporting himself on 
a stick, was returning to his castle, when he perceived a 
jackdaw, a blackbird, a magpie, and a crow, seated on 
the roof of the out-house. He remembered the words of 
the old man "For the young the blackbird whistles, 
the magpie chatters, and the crow croaks, the hens 
cackle, and the doves coo ; for the old man, the birds 
speak." He listened attentively, and the following is the 
dialogue he heard : 

BLACKBIRD. Enfin mon beau chasseur, te*eoil& de retour. 
JACKDAW. Tel qui part pour un an croit partir pour un jour. 
CROW. Tu fis la-chasse & 1'aigle, ou milan, ou vautour. 
MAGPIE. Mieux etit valu la faire au doux oiseau d'amour ! 
HEN. Pecopin ! Pecopin ! 
DOVE. Bauldour ! Bauldour ! Bauldour! 



LETTER XXII. 




IJINGEN. 

Houses at Bingen. Paradise Plain. The Klopp. Mdlle. Bertin. The 
sage. 

INGEN is an exceedingly pretty 
place, having at once the sombre look 
of an ancient town, and the cheering 
aspect of a new one. From the days of 
Consul Drusus to those of the empe- 
ror Charlemagne, from Charlemagne 
to Archbishop Willigis, from Willigis to the merchant 
Montemagno, and from Montemagno to the visionary 
Holyhausen, the town gradually increased in the number 
of its houses, as the dew gathers drop by drop in the cup 
of a lily. Excuse this comparison ; for, though flowery, 
it has truth to back it, and faithfully illustrates the mode 
in which a town near the conflux of two rivers is con- 
structed. The irregularity of the houses in fact every- 
thing tends to make Bingen a kind of antithesis, both 
with respect to buildings and the scenery which surrounds 
them. The town, bounded on the left by the Nahue, 
and by the Rhine on the right, develops itself in a trian- 



196 THE KLOPP. 

gular form near a Gothic church, which is backed by a 
Roman citadel. In this citadel, which bears the date of 
the first century, and has long been the haunt of bandits, 
there is a garden ; and in the church, which is of the fif- 
teenth century, is the tomb of Barthelemy de Holzhausen. 
In the direction of Mayence, the famed Paradise Plain 
opens upon the Ringau ; and in that of Coblentz, the 
dark mountains of Leyen seem to frown on the surround- 
ing scenery. Here Nature smiles like a lovely woman 
extended unadorned on the greensward ; there, like a 
slumbering giant, she excites a feeling of awe. 

The more we examine this beautiful place, the more 
the antithesis is multiplied under our looks and thoughts. 
It assumes a thousand different forms ; and as the Nahue 
flows through the arches of the stone bridge, upon the 
parapet of which the lion of Hesse turns its back to the 
eagle of Prussia, the green arm of the Rhine seizes sud- 
denly the fair and indolent stream, and plunges it into 
the Bingerloch. 

To sit down towards the evening on the summit of the 
Klopp, to see the town at its base, with an immense ho- 
rizon on all sides, the mountains overshadowing all to see 
the slated roofs smoking, the shadows lengthening, and 
the scenery breathing to life the verses of Virgil to re- 
spire at once the wind which rustles the leaves, the breeze 
of the flood, and the gale of the mountain is an exquisite 
and inexpressible pleasure, full of secret enjoyment, which 
is veiled by the grandeur of the spectacle, by the intensity 
of contemplation. At the windows of huts, young 
women, their eyes fixed upon their work, are gaily sing- 
ing ; among the weeds that grow round the ruins ; 



THE KLOPP. 197 

birds whistle and pair ; barks are crossing the river, and 
the sound of oars splashing in the water, and un- 
furling of sails, reaches our ears. The washerwomen of 
the Rhine spread their clothes on the bushes ; and those of 
the Nahue, their feet and legs naked, beat their linen upon 
floating rafts, and laugh at some poor artist as he sketches 
Ehrenfels. 

The sun sets, night comes on, the slated roofs of the 
houses appear as one, the mountains seem to congregate 
and take the aspect of an immense dark body ; and the 
washerwomen, with bundles on their heads, return cheer- 
fully to their cabins : the noise subsides, the voices are 
hushed ; a faint light, resembling the reflection of the 
other world upon the wan countenance of a dying man, 
is for a short time observable on the Ehrenfels ; then all is 
dark, except the tower of Hatto, which, though scarcely 
seen in day, makes its appearance at night, amidst a light 
smoke and the reverberations of the forge. 

A few days ago I was seated.on the platform of Klopp, 
and in a reverie had allowed my thoughts to wander at 
freedom. Suddenly, a small skylight window under my 
feet was opened, and I perceived a young girl at the win- 
dow, who was singing to a slow and plaintive air, in a 
clear, rich voice, the following stanza : 

" Plasmi cavalier frances 
E la dona catalana 
E 1'onraz del ginoes 
E la court de castelana 
Lou cantaz provencales 
E la danza trevisana 
E lou corps aragones 
La mans a kara d'angles 
E lou donzel de Toscana." 

s3 



198 MADEMOISELLE BERTIN. 

I immediately recognised the joyful verses of Frederick 
Barberousse. It would be impossible for me to describe 
the effect they had upon me when heard in this ancient 
ruin, in the midst of obscurity that song of the emperors, 
sung by a young girl ; these Roman verses, accented by 
a German tongue ; that gaiety of by-gone times changed 
into melancholy ; that ray of the Crusades piercing the 
shadow of the present, and throwing its light upon me 
poor bewildered dreamer ! 

Since I have spoken of the music which I heard upon 
the Rhine, why not mention that which I heard when at 
Bacherach ? Several students, seated upon the trunk of a 
tree, sang to German words that admirable air in " Qua- 
simode" which is the most beautiful and most original in 
Mademoiselle Bertin's opera. The future, doubt it not, 
my friend, will render justice to that remarkable opera, 
which on its appearance was unfairly attacked and un- 
justly dealt with. The public, too often duped by unge- 
nerous criticisms, by the malice of rivalry, with respect 
to works of genius, will think for itself, and will one day 
admire that soft and profound music, so pathetic and 
powerful, at moments melancholy yet pleasing music, so 
to speak, where, in each note, is mixed that which is 
most tender and most grave the heart of a lady and the 
mind of a sage. Germany has already rendered her jus- 
tice, France will soon follow her example. 

As I care little about what are termed local curiosities, 
I must admit that I did not see the miraculous horn, nor 
the nuptial bed, nor the iron chair of old Broemser. To 
make amends, I visited the square dungeon of Rude- 



A SAGE. 199 

sheim, the manor, Roman caves, and saw lanterns of the 
thirteenth century, and numerous sepulchral urns. 

In the room where I was accustomed to dine at Bingen, 
I saw two individuals seated at opposite tables. There 
was such a contrast, both in their appearance and in their 
repast, that it could not fail to excite attention. The one 
was a huge Bavarian major, who spoke a little French, 
and who allowed dish after dish to be taken away with- 
out scarcely touching them ; the other was a poor- 
looking devil, seated before a plate of choucroute, who, 
after having eaten his meagre pittance, finished his din- 
ner by devouring with his eyes the respective loaded 
plates of his neighbour. The words of Albancourt struck 
me forcibly when looking at that living parable : 

" La Providence met volontiers I 'argent d'un cote et 
I'appetit de I'autre." 

The poor fellow was a young savant, pale, grave, and 
melancholy. It was said that he was in love with one of 
the servants of the auberge, which is rather strange, for 
to me a savant in love is a problem. How is it possible 
that the studies, the dull experiments, and minute ob- 
servations which compose the life of a sage, can agree 
with the hope, disappointment, jealousy, rage, and loss 
of time which attend the tender passion. Imagine how 
Doctor Huxham could have loved, who, in his excellent 
treatise "De ^Ere et MorbisEpidemicis," has told, month 
after month, the quantity of rain that fell at Plymouth 
during the period of twenty-two years. Imagine Romeo 
looking through a microscope, and counting the seven- 
teen thousand facettes of the eye of a fly ; Don Juan, with 
an apron on, analyzing the paratar trovinate of potash ; 



200 A TABLE D'HOTE. 

and Othello, in a stooping posture, looking for gaillon- 
nelles in the fossils of China. 

However, in spite of all laws, this poor devil was in 
love. At times he spoke French, which was far superior 
to the major's, and his address was more gentlemanly 
yet he had not a stiver. Sometimes my young savant 
drank, during the hours at table d'h6te, a bottle of small 
beer, while his eye surveyed in envy the opening and 
shutting mouths of the inmates of the hotel Victoria. 
The society here was rather mixed, and not at all har- 
monious. At the end of the table was an old English 
dame, and by her side three pretty children : she was 
apparently a governess or an aunt, whose consequential 
airs raised in my heart a feeling of sympathy for the 
pretty little ones. The major was seated near her, to 
whom, for politesse, he addressed his conversation, at one 
time describing an engagement, at another telling that he 
was going to Baden, because everybody went there. On 
his right hand was an advocate ; and next to the advocate 
was an old man, whose thin grey hair and reverential 
mien had that mild appearance which a near approach to 
the grave gives, and which cites in every look the beau- 
tiful verses of Homer. In front of the old gentleman 
was my young sage, who in French, spoke pompously of 
the "harrangues" that were brought from the sea. To 
me "harens" (herrings) would be more likely to come 
from such a quarter. 

One day I invited him to dine with me, which invita- 
tion was cordially accepted the more so, perhaps, be- 
cause the poor fellow had not breakfasted. We chatted 
a little, took a walk, and afterwards visited the Island of 



A GOD-SEND. 201 

Rats, which pleased my companion very much; for a 
good dinner, a gratuitous sail, and a chit-chat with the 
worthy blacksmiths, were things which were not of an 
everyday occurrence with him. Such were my adven- 
tures at Bingen. 



LETTER XXIII. 

MAYENCE. 

Cathedral its interior. Henry Frauenlob, the asso -Mayence. 
Market place. 

AYENCE and Frankfort, like Ver- 
sailles and Paris, may, at the present 
time, be called one town. In the 
middle age there was a distance of 
eight leagues between them, which 
was then considered a long journey; 
now, an hour and a quarter will suffice to transport you 
from one to the other. The buildings of Frankfort and 
Mayence, like those of Liege, have been devastated by 
modern good taste, and old and venerable edifices are 
rapidly disappearing, giving place to frightful groups of 
white houses. I expected to see, at Mayence, Martins- 
burgh, which, up to the seventeenth century, was the 
feudal residence of the ecclesiastical electors ; but the 
French made an hospital of it, which was afterwards razed 




THE TASSO OF MAYENCE. 203 

to the ground to make room for the Porte Franc : the 
merchants' hotel, built in 1317 by the famed league, and 
which was splendidly decorated with the statues of seven 
electors, and surmounted by two colossal figures, bearing 
the crown of the empire, also shared the same fate. 
Mayence, however, though plunged into the renaissance, 
possesses that which marks its antiquity a venerable 
cathedral, which was commenced in 978, and finished in 
1009. Part of this superb structure was burnt in 1190, 
and since that period has, from century to century, un- 
dergone some change. 

I explored its interior, and was struck with awe on 
beholding innumerable tombs, bearing dates as far back 
as the eighteenth century. Under the galleries of the 
cloister I observed an obscure monument, a bas-relief of 
the fourteenth century, and tried, in vain, to guess the 
enigma. On one side are two men in chains, wildness in 
their looks, and despair in their attitudes ; on the other, 
an emperor, accompanied by a bishop, and surrounded by 
a crowd of people, triumphing. Is it Barberousse ? Is 
it Louis of Bavaria ? Does it speak of the revolt of 1 160, 
or of the war between Mayence and Frankfort in 1332 ? 
I could not tell, and therefore passed by. 

As I was leaving the galleries I discovered in the shade 
a sculptured head half-protruding from the wall, sur- 
mounted by a crown of flower-work, similar to that worn 
by the kings of the eleventh century. I looked : it had 
a mild countenance; yet it possessed something of 
severity in it a face imprinted with that august 
beauty which the workings of a great mind give to the 
countenance of man. The hand of some peasant had 
chalked the name Frauenlob above it, and I instantly re- 



204 



THE MARKET-PLACE. 



membered the Tasso of Mayence, so calumniated during 
his life, so venerated after his death. When Henry Frau- 
enlob died, which was in the year 1318, the females who 
had insulted him in life carried his coffin to the tomb, 
which procession is chiselled on the tombstone beneath. 
I again looked at that noble head. The sculptor had left 
the eyes open ; and thus, in that church of sepulchres in 
that resting-place of kings and of bishops in that cloister 
of the dead the poet alone sees ; he only is represented 
standing, and observing all. 

The market-place, which is by the side of the cathe- 
dral, has rather an amusing and pleasing aspect. In the 
middle is a pretty triangular fountain of the German 
renaissance, which, besides having sceptres, nymphs, 
angels, dolphins, and mermaids, serves as a pedestal to 
the Virgin Mary. Upon one of the faces is the following 
pentameter : 

"Albertus princeps civibus ipse suis." 

This fountain was erected by Albert de Brandenburg, 
who reigned in 1540, in commemoration of the capture of 
Francis the Fkst by Charles the Fifth. 

MAYENCE, white 
though it be, re- 

pect of a mercan- 
tile city. The river 
here is not less 
crowded with sails, 
the town not less 
encumbered with 
bales, nor more free 




MAYENCE. 205 

from bustle, than formerly. People walk, speak, push, 
sell, buy, sing, and cry; in fact, in all quarters of 
the towa, in every house, life seems to predominate. At 
night the buzz and noise cease, and nothing is heard at 
Mayence but the murmurings of the Rhine, and the ever- 
lasting noise of seventeen water-mills, which are fixed to 
the piles of the bridge of Charlemagne. 



LETTER XXIV. 




FRANKFORT ON THE MAINE. 

Jews at Frankfort. Slaughter-house. Roemer. Inhabitants of the 
Steeple. 

ARRIVED at Frankfort on a Saturday ; 
and after walking for some time in search 
of the beauties of my old favourite town, 
I came to a singular street, with two long 
ranges of high, sombre, and sinister-look- 
ing houses, clinging to each other, as it were, with terror. 
Not a door was open, not a window that was not secured 
with iron gratings. There was no singing, no merry 
voices ; no a dismal silence reigned over all. One or 
two men passed, who looked at me with an air of suspi- 
cion and discontent, and through the bars of iron of the 
third-floor windows I observed several females, whose 
countenances were of a brown colour, and who looked 
with stealth, to see who was passing. I was in the street 
of the Jews ; it was their Sabbath. 



SLAUGHTER-HOUSE. 207 

At Frankfort there are still Jews and Christians true 
Christians who despise the Jews, and Jews who hate the 
Christians. 

Perhaps in no town in the world are there so many 
statues and figures about 'the streets as there are at 
Frankfort. Whichever way we turn, statues of all epochs, 
of all styles, and of all sexes, are sure to meet the eye ; 
horned satyrs, nymphs, dwarfs, giants, sphinxes, dragons, 
devils : in fact, an unfortunate world of supernatural be- 
ings is to be seen here. 

One of the curiosities of Frankfort is the slaughter- 
house. It is impossible to see older and blacker houses 
decorated with more splendid legs of mutton and loins of 
beef. Gluttonous and jovial-looking figures are curiously 
sculptured upon the fa9ades, and the openings of the 
ground-floors seem like huge mouths, ready to devour in- 
numerable cattle, either living or dead. The blood-be- 
daubed butcher chats freely with the rosy- cheeked bou- 
cheres under garlands of gigots, and before a red stream, 
on which two fountains are playing, as it runs smoking 
through the middle of the street. When I was there, 
frightful cries were heard in all directions : it was a mas- 
sacre of sucking-pigs that was taking place. Servants, 
with baskets on their arms, were laughing amidst the 
general uproar, and casting amorous looks towards some 
stalworth youths, with knives in their hands, who were 
ready to obey the demands of their customers : here, some 
bargaining ; there, others quarrelling. A butcher passed 
carrying a sucking-pig by the hind legs, which I would 
have purchased had I known what] to do with it. The 

T'2 



208 THE ROEJVIER. 

poor little creature squeaked not ; it was ignorant of its im- 
pending fate, and knew not what was about to take place. 
A pretty little girl, about four years of age, was looking 
at it with compassion ; and seemed to beseech me with 
her soft eyes to purchase the little thing, and save it from 
immediate death. I did not do what that charming eye 
told me ; I disobeyed her demand, so sweetly expressed ; 
but I reproached myself afterwards for not gratifying the 
wishes of that innocent child. 

After leaving the slaughter-house, we enter a large 
square, worthy of Flanders, and which excites the curio- 
sity of all travellers. It comprises all the styles of archi- 
tecture of the Renaissance, and is ornamented according 
to the taste of that epoch. Near the middle of the square 
are two fountains the one of the Renaissance, and the 
other of the eighteenth century, upon the tops of which 
are the statues of Minerva and Judith, the Homeric 
and biblical viragos ; the former bearing the head of 
Medusa, the latter that of Holofernes. 

Opposite this fountain is the Roemer, where emperors 
were proclaimed. I entered, and wandered along a large 
hall with a long staircase, then amongst innumerable 
corridors. After visiting the electors' hall, I came to the 
collegiate church of Frankfort, which is dedicated to St. 
Bartholemy. In the nave are various marble statues, 
and in the choir several very fine paintings. 

Wishing to ascend the steeple, I clambered up a nar- 
row staircase, which led me to the platform of Pfarr- 
thurm. The view here was charming. Over my head 
was a lovely sun ; at my feet, the town of Frankfort ; to 




INHABITANTS OF THE STEEPLE. 209 

my left, the Roemer ; and to ray right, the black and 
narrow street of the Jews. 

Whilst buried in a pro- 
found reverie, the clouds 
gathered above me, and, 
chased by the wind, rolled 
about the heavens, covering 
and uncovering at each in- 
stant shreds of azure, while 
heavy drops of rain began 
to fall upon the earth, and 
lightning to flash from the 
heavens. I thought I was 
alone upon the tower, and 
would have remained there 
all day, but suddenly a rustling noise startled me, 
and on looking round I perceived a young girl, about 
fourteen years of age, looking at me from a small win- 
dow, I advanced a few steps, and, after passing the angle 
of the Pfarrthurm, I found myself amongst the inhabit- 
ants of the steeple a little world smiling and happy. A 
young girl was knitting ; an old woman, probably her 
mother, spinning : doves were cooing on the top of the 
steeple ; and an hospitable monkey, on perceiving me, 
extended its little paw from the bottom of its cage. Add 
to this the peace of elevated places, where nothing is 
heard but the murmuring of the winds, and from whence 
we see the beauty of the surrounding country. In a part 
of the tower the old woman had made a fire, on which she 
was cooking a humble repast. How this little family 
came there, and for what end, I do not know ; but they 

T3 



210 INHABITANTS OF THE STEEPLE. 

interested me much. This proud city, once engaged in 
so many wars, this city, which dethroned so many 
Caesars, this city, whose walls were like an armour, is 
at present crowned by the hearth of a poor old woman. 



LETTER XXV. 



THE RHINE. 

Rafts on the Rhine. Secret Souvenirs. Oberwerth. 




HE Rhine assumes all aspects at 
one time broad, then narrow. It is 
transparent, tranquil, and rapid ; it is 
a torrent at Schaffouse, a gulf at Lau- 
fen, a river at Sickingen, a flood at 
Mayence, a lake at St. Goar, and a 
marsh at Leyde. 

The Rhine is calm, at least towards evening, and ap- 
pears as if sleeping a phenomenon more apparent than 
real, and which is visible upon all great rivers.* The part 
of the Rhine the most celebrated and admired, the most 
curious for the historian, and the loveliest for the poet,., 
is that which traverses, from Bingen to Koenigswinter, 
that dark chaos of volcanic mounds which the Romans 
termed the Alpes des Cattes. 



212 THE RHINE. 

From Mayence to Bingen, as from Koenigswinter to 
Cologne, there are seven leagues of rich smiling plains, 
with handsome villages, on the river's brink ; but the 
great encaissement of the Rhine begins at Bingen by the 
Rupertsberg and Niederwald, and terminates at Krenigs- 
winter at the base of the Seven Mountains. 

At each turning of the river, a group of houses a 
town or borough develops itself, with a huge tower in 
ruins peering over it. These hamlets present an impos- 
ing aspect: young women are seen busily washing and 
singing, with children playing round them ; the basket- 
maker at work on the door-step of his hut ; the fisher- 
man mending his net in his boat ; and above their heads 
the sun ripening the vine upon the hill ; all perform 
what God has ordered man as well as the orb of day. 

At the time of the Romans and of the Barbarians the 
Rhine was termed the "street" of soldiers; in the 
middle ages, when the river was bordered with ecclesias- 
tical states, and, from its source to its mouth, was under 
the control of the Abbot of St. Gall, the Bishops of 
Constance, Bale, Spire, Worms, the Archbishop-Electors 
of Mayence, Treves, and Cologne, the Rhine was called 
" the street of the priests ;" at present it is that of the 
merchants. 

The traveller who ascends the river sees it, so to speak, 
coming to him, and then the sight is full of charms. At 
each instant he meets something which passes him ; at 
one time, a vessel crowded with peasants, especially if it 
be Sunday ; at another, a steam-boat ; then a long, two- 
masted vessel, laden with merchandise, its pilot attentive 
and serious, its sailors busy, with women seated near the 



RAFTS 

door of the cabin ; here, a heavy-looking boat, dragging 
two or three after it ; there, a little horse drawing a 
huge bark, as an ant drags a dead beetle. Suddenly 
there is a winding in the river ; and formerly, on turn- 
ing, an immense raft, a floating-house, presented itself, 
the oars splashing on both sides. On the ponderous ma- 
chine were cattle of all kinds, some bleating, and others 
bellowing when they perceived the heifers peaceably 
grazing on the banks. The master came and went, 
looked at this, then at that, while the sailors busily per- 
formed their respective duties. A whole village seemed 
to live on this float on this prodigious construction of fir. 
It is, perhaps, difficult to imagine such an island of 
wood coming and going from Namedy to Dordrecht, 
along the windings and turnings, the falls and serpentine 
meanderings of the Rhine. Wrecks, it is true, frequently 
take place, which give rise to the saying, " that a float 
merchant ought to have three capitals the first upon 
the Rhine, the second on land, and the third in his pocket. 
The conducting of each of these enormous construc- 
tions was left entirely to the charge of one man. At 
the end of the last century, the great maitre flotteur of 
Rudesheim was called " Old Jung." He died : since 
that time these great floats have disappeared. 

At present, twenty -five steamers are now engaged on 
the Rhine, nineteen of which belong to the Cologne 
Steam Company, and are constantly plying from Stras- 
burg to Dusseldorf ; they are known by their white and 
black funnels. The remaining six belong to the Dussel- 
dorf Company, which have tri- coloured funnels, and ply 
from Mayence to Rotterdam. The ancient mode of na- 



214 SECRET SOUVENIRS. 

vigating the Rhine, which was by vessels with sails, con- 
trasts strangely with the present. The steam-boats, with 
life in their appearance, rapid, comfortable, and painted 
with the colours of all nations, have for invocation the 
names of princes and of cities, Ludwig II., Gross, Her- 
zog von Hessen, Konigin, Victoria, Herzog von Nassau, 
Prinzessin Mariann, Gross Herzog von Baden, Stadt 
Manheim, Stadt Coblentz, The sailing-vessels glide 
slowly along, and have at their prows grave and reve- 
rential names, such as Pius, Columbus, Amor Sancta 
Maria, Gratia Dei. The steam-boat is varnished and 
gold-lettered ; the sailing-boat is bedaubed with pitch. 
The one pursues its way from place to place, be- 
seeching of men ; the other continues its course in 
prayer. The one depends upon man ; the other has 
placed its reliance in God food, and that which is the 
gift of Heaven, being its cargo. 

From Cologne to Mayence there are forty nine islands, 
covered with thick verdure, which hide the smoking 
roofs, and shade the barks in their charming havens, each 
bearing some secret souvenir : Graupenwertl , where the 
Hollanders constructed a fort, and called it " 1'he Priest's 
Bonnet;" Pfaffenmuth, a fort which the Spaniards took, 
and gave it the name of ** Isabella ;" Grasuerth, the 
island of grass, where Jean Philippe de Reiehenberg 
wrote his " Antiquitates Saynenses ;" Niederwerth, for- 
merly so rich with the gifts of the Margrave Archbishop, 
Jean II. ; Urmitzer Insel, which was well known to 
Caesar; and Nonnenswerth, the frequented spot of 
Roland. 

The souvenirs of the banks of the Rhine seem to have 



OBERWERTH. 215 

responded to those of the islands, and whatever took place 
on one side was sure to have given rise to something else 
on the opposite one. Permit me to run over a few of 
them. The coffin of Saint Nizza, grand-daughter of 
Louis-le-Debonnaire, is at Cologne; the tomb of Saint 
Ida, cousin of Charles Martel, is at Cologne. St. Gene- 
vieve lived in the woods at Fraunkirch, near a mineral 
fountain, which is still seen, adjoining a chapel that was 
built to her memory. It was Schinderhannes who, with 
a pistol in his hand, forced a band of Jews to take off 
their shoes; then, after mixing them, ordered each person 
to take the first pair he could find and be off, for he 
would put the last to instant death. The terrified Jews 
did so, and fled precipitately, some stumbling, others 
limping and hobbling, making a strange clattering noise, 
which excited the laughter of Jean 1'Ecorcheur. 

When the traveller has passed Coblentz, and left 
behind him the graceful island of Oberwerth, the mouth 
of the Lahn strikes his attention. The sight here is 
admirable. The two crumbling towers of Johanniskirch, 
which vaguely resemble Jumeiges, rise, as it were, from 
the water's brink. To the right, above the borough of 
Cappellan, the magnificent fortress of Stolzenfels stands 
upon the brow of a huge rock ; and to the left, at the 
bottom of the horizon, the clouds and the setting sun 
mingle with the sombre ruins of Lahneck, which abound 
with enigmas for the historian, and darkness for the 
antiquary. On each side of the Lahn is a pretty town, 
Niederlahnstein and Oberlahnstein, which seem smiling 
at each other. A few stone-throws from the oriental 
gate of Oberlahnstein, the trees of an orchard disclose, 



216 THE GUTENFELS. 

and at the same time hide, a small chapel of the four- 
teenth century, which is surmounted by a mean-looking 
steeple. The deposition of Wencesles took place here. 

In front of this chapel, upon the opposite bank, is 
ancient Kcenigsstuhl, which, not more than half a 
century ago, was the seat of royalty, and where the em- 
perors were elected by the seven electors of Germany. 
At present, four stones mark the place where it formerly 
stood. After leaving this place, the traveller proceeds 
towards Braubach ; passes Boppart, Welmich, Saint Goar, 
Oberwesel; and suddenly comes to an immense rock, 
surmounted by an enormous tower on the right bank of 
the river. At the base of the rock is a pretty little 
town with a Roman church in the centre ; and opposite 
in the middle of the Rhine is a strange, oblong edifice, 
whose back and front resemble the prow and poop of 
a vessel, and whose large and low windows are like 
hatches and port-holes. 

This tower is the Gutenfels ; this town is Caub ; 
this stone ship eternally on the Rhine, and always at 
anchor is the Palace or Pfalz. To enter this symbolic 
residence, which is built upon a bank of marble, called 
" the Rock of the Palatine Counts," we must ascend a 
ladder that rests upon a drawbridge, a portion of which 
is still to be seen. 

From Taunus to the Seven Mountains there are four- 
teen castles on the right bank of the river, and fifteen 
on the left, making in all twenty-nine, which bear the 
souvenirs of volcanoes, the traces of war, and the devas- 
tations of time. Four of these castles were built in the 
eleventh century Ehrenfels, by the Archbishop of Siege 



ANCIENT CASTLES. 217 

fried ; Stahleck, by the Counts Palatine ; Sayn, by Fre- 
derick, first Count of Sayn, and vanquisher of the Moors 
of Spain ; and the others at a later period. 

This long and double row of venerable edifices, at 
once poetic and military, which bear upon their front all 
the epochs of the Rhine, every one having its sieges and 
its legends, begins at Bingen, by the Ehrenfels on the 
right, and by the Rat Tower on the left, and finishes at 
Koenigs winter, by the Rolandseck on the left, and the 
Drachenfels on the right. 

The number which I have given only includes those 
castles that are on the banks of the Rhine, and which 
every traveller will see in passing ; but should he explore 
the valleys and ascend the mountains, he will meet a ruin 
at every step ; and if he ascend the Seven Mountains, he 
will find an abbey, Schomberg, and six castles the Dra- 
chenfels, Wolkenburg, Lowenberg, Nonnestromberg, and 
the (Elberg, the last of which was built by Valentinian, 
in the year 368. 

In the plain near Mayence is Frauenstein, which was 
built in the twelfth century, Scharfenstein and Greifenk- 
lau ; and on the Cologne side is the admirable castle of 
Godesberg. 

These ancient castles which border the Rhine, these 
collossal bounds, built by Feodalite, fill the country with 
reveries and pleasant associations. They have been 
mute witnesses of bygone ages prominent features 
in great actions ; and their walls have echoed the cries 
of war and the murmurings of peace. They stand 
there like eternal monuments of the dark dramas which, 
since the tenth century, have been played on the Rhine. 



218 ANCIENT CASTLES. 

They have witnessed, so to speak, monks of all orders, 
men of all ranks; and there is not an historical fact in 
the lives of those men who took a prominent part on the 
Rhine that is not designed on their venerable walls. 
They have listened to the voice of Petrarch : they saw, in 
1415, the eastern bishops, proud and haughty, going to 
the assembly of divines at Constance, to try Jean Huss ; 
in 1441, going to the council of Bale, to depose Eugene 
IV: ; and, in 1519, to the diet of Worms, to interrogate 
Luther : they witnessed, floating on the Rhine, the 
body of Saint Werner, who fell a martyr to the Jews in 
1287. In fact, all the great events, from the ninth to the 
nineteenth century, that transpired on, the banks of the 
flood, have, as it were, come under their notice. They are 
mute recorders of the things that were of Pepin, of 
Charlemagne, of Charles the Fifth, and of Napoleon. All 
the great events which, time after time, shook and fright- 
ened Europe, have, like the lightning's flash, lightened up 
these old walls. At present it is the moon and the sun 
which shed their light upon these ancient edifices, famed 
in story and gnawed by time, whose walls are falling 
stone by stone into the Rhine, and whose dates are fast 
dwindling into oblivion. 

O noble towers ! O poor paralysed giants ! A steam- 
boat filled with merchants and with peasants, when pass- 
ing, hurls its smoke in your faces. 



THE END. 




30112041957082 



